The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2016-0256.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: happiness, income comparisons, transparency

Page 1 of 72

The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment
By Ricardo Perez-Truglia∗
In 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online,
allowing everyone in the country to observe the incomes of everyone else. According to the income comparisons model, this change
in transparency can widen the gap in well-being between richer and
poorer individuals. Using survey data from 1985–2013 and multiple identification strategies, we show that the higher transparency
increased the gap in happiness between richer and poorer individuals by 29%, and it increased the life satisfaction gap by 21%. We
provide back-of-the-envelope estimates of the importance of income
comparisons, and discuss implications for the ongoing debate on
transparency policies.
The income comparisons model proposes that individual well-being largely
depends on how that individual’s income compares to the incomes of others
(Luttmer, 2005). This is a fundamental aspect of individual preferences, yet
no consensus exists about the importance of income comparisons.1 In this study,
we offer novel evidence based on a unique natural experiment: in 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the country
to observe the incomes of everyone else quickly and easily. We test the hypothesis that, consistent with the model of income comparisons, increased income
transparency widens the gap in well-being between richer and poorer individuals.
Tax records have been public in Norway since the nineteenth century, but they
have not always been easily accessible. Before 2001, one had to make a formal
request in person at the tax agency to see someone else’s income. In the fall
of 2001, the Norwegian media digitized tax records and created websites that
allowed any individual with Internet access to search anyone’s tax records. Every
Norwegian was one click away from finding out the incomes of everyone else in
the country.
∗ University of California, Los Angeles, Anderson School of Management, Office C515, 110 Westwood
Plaza, Los Angeles CA 90403, ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu. Thanks to Ipsos MMI for providing
access to the survey data. Thanks to Ottar Hellevik for all his help with this study. Thanks to Erzo
F.P. Luttmer, the Editor and reviewers for invaluable feedback. I also benefited from the feedback from
several colleagues as well as seminar discussants at Harvard, Princeton, Yale, Universidad de San Andres,
LMU Munich, ITAM, CIDE, Universidad Catolica de Chile, Universidad de la Republica, RAND, the
BESH Research Symposium, the AEA Annual Meetings, the USC Happiness Conference and the NBER
Summer Institute. Diego Marino Fages provided outstanding research assistance. The first draft of this
paper circulated in August 2015 under the title “Measuring the Value of Self- and Social-Image.”
1 This question is important to understand preferences more deeply, and also due to its implications
for income taxation and other policies. For example, income comparisons can create positional externalities that reduce social welfare and could be corrected with taxes (e.g., Boskin and Sheshinski, 1978;
Frank, 1985).

1

Page 2 of 72

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

We use various data sources to show the massive popularity of these online
tax lists. During the busiest week of the year, these websites were more popular
than YouTube. We also show that, rather than using the tax lists for legitimate
goals (e.g., uncovering corruption or tax evasion), most used the websites to
snoop on friends, relatives, and social contacts. For example, users could create
leaderboards showing the highest and lowest earners among their Facebook friends
or maps showing the incomes of everyone living around a specific location. This
behavior became so pervasive that the Norwegian media dubbed it “tax porn.”
Because income transparency facilitates income comparisons, it can widen the
gap in well-being between richer and poorer individuals. Poorer individuals often
lose this game of income comparisons. For example, if they learn that they are
poorer than they thought (Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz, 2013), it can lower
their self-esteem. If their social contacts learn how poor they are, it can reduce
their social-esteem. In contrast, richer individuals often benefit from this game.
Learning that they are richer than they thought can boost their self-esteem. And
being looked up by their social contacts can boost their social-esteem.2
To test this hypothesis, we measure the effect of the increase in transparency
on the gradient between subjective well-being and individual income rank (hereinafter referred to as the happiness-income gradient). We use survey data from
Norway from 1985–2013 that includes the two most widely used measures of subjective well-being: happiness and life satisfaction. Despite some limitations of
these subjective measures, evidence suggests that they contain useful information
about well-being. For example, life satisfaction and happiness have been shown to
be significantly correlated with objective measures of well-being and with decision
utility (Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald, 2003; Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and
Rees-Jones, 2012).
Consistent with the hypothesis of income comparisons, we show that the 2001
income transparency change led to a 29% increase in the happiness-income gradient (p-value=0.005) and a 21% increase in the life satisfaction-income gradient
(p-value=0.026).
We use multiple strategies to identify the causal effect of the transparency
change of 2001. First, we conduct an event-study analysis and find that the
happiness-income gradient stayed constant in the years before the change, increased in 2001, and persisted at the higher level during the subsequent twelve
years of higher transparency.
Second, we identify individuals who were most likely to be exposed to the
effects of online tax lists, based on observable characteristics that predict Internet
access. We show that, between 1985 and 2000, the happiness-income gradient
remained stable for individuals with low and high Internet access. After 2001,
the happiness-income gradient remained at the pre-2001 level for individuals with
2 Different individuals may react differently to the increased transparency. For example, while some
rich individuals may feel happy that their neighbors caught a glimpse of their income, others may feel
uneasy about the same situation (e.g., if they do not feel deserving of their high income). In this study,
we can only measure which of these different mechanisms dominates on average.

Page 3 of 72

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE EFFECTS OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING

3

lower Internet access but increased substantially and persisted at the higher level
for individuals with higher Internet access.
Our third identification strategy reproduces the analysis using similar survey
data from Germany, a country that was not affected by the Norwegian change in
income transparency. Similar results for Germany would indicate that another
factor, such as the dot-com bubble, caused the change in the happiness-income
gradient in Norway. In sharp contrast to the Norwegian findings, however, the life
satisfaction-income gradient did not change around 2001 in Germany. The eventstudy analysis shows that this gradient remained stable in Germany from 1985 to
2013, both in the population at large and in the sub-populations of individuals
with higher and lower Internet access.
Anecdotal evidence supports our finding that higher income transparency increased the well-being gap between richer and poorer households. For example,
the media reported that the online tax lists led to bullying of kids from poorer
households and that adults from poorer households felt that they disappointed
themselves and others (Aftenposten, 2008; New York Times, 2009). Our findings also align with survey data indicating that, relative to richer households,
poorer households were more likely to oppose the income transparency policy
(Aftenposten, 2011).
The effects of income transparency may operate through multiple mechanisms.
We provide suggestive evidence for one specific mechanism: self-perceptions. According to this channel, richer individuals may be happier because they learn that
they are richer than they thought, and poorer individuals may be unhappier because they learn that they are poorer than they thought. We show that, indeed,
transparency increased the gradient between perceived income rank and actual
income rank by 8.5% (p-value<0.001) and the gradient between the perceived adequacy of one’s income and income rank by 4.7% (p-value=0.083). This evidence
cannot prove or rule out the self-perceptions channel, but it does serve as suggestive evidence. Moreover, the perceived rank and income adequacy gradients
(8.5% and 4.7%) are smaller than the changes in the happiness and life satisfaction gradients (29% and 21%), which suggests the presence of other mediating
factors besides self-perceptions.
We use the estimated effects of transparency to quantify the importance of
income comparisons. Our back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, as a
conservative lower bound, income comparisons accounted for 22% of the happiness
that individuals in Norway derived from their incomes during the period of higher
transparency. Moreover, we show that this lower bound is consistent with the
effect of relative income on happiness, as reported in related studies.
Our evidence also relates to the ongoing debate on transparency. Technological advances have made it possible for everyone to know potentially everything
about everyone else, sparking debates on whether the government should disclose
its data, such as tax records. Some arguments that favor or oppose transparency

Page 4 of 72

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

are rooted in philosophical grounds.3 However, most arguments seem to be based
on the potential effects of transparency. In particular, detractors of income transparency argued that the tax lists were used in despicable ways to harm the wellbeing of poorer individuals.4 This argument, however, was based on qualitative
and anecdotal evidence. This study provides the first quantitative evidence on
this matter.
Beyond the Norwegian experience, information disclosure may directly affect
well-being in other contexts. In the 2000s, Sweden, Iceland, and Finland had
to decide whether to make their tax records as easily accessible as in Norway.
Outside of Scandinavia, governments disclose all sorts of sensitive information,
such as the salaries of public employees (Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez, 2012; Mas,
2017), individual contributions to political campaigns (Perez-Truglia and Cruces,
2018), and identities of criminals and tax delinquents (Linden and Rockoff, 2008;
Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018). Our findings suggest that it is important to
measure the well-being effects of disclosing sensitive data and to account for them
in the cost-benefit analysis.
This paper relates to various strands of literature. Most important, it relates to
a literature on the effect of relative income on well-being. In a seminal contribution, Easterlin (1974) showed evidence that happiness and income are positively
correlated across individuals within a country but that average happiness in a
country does not seem to rise over time as average income rises. One standard
explanation for the paradox is that happiness depends on relative income. Within
a given country, richer individuals have higher relative income, so they are happier. However, as every individual in the country becomes richer, the average
relative income stays constant, and thus average happiness also remains constant.
Consistent with this interpretation, several studies have shown that, holding own
income constant, subjective well-being decreases with the mean income of neighbors (Luttmer, 2004; Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2005).5
However, this evidence is subject to concerns about causal identification. For
example, the Balassa–Samuelson model (Balassa, 1964; Samuelson, 1964) predicts that consumer prices should be higher in areas where nominal incomes are
higher. Thus, even in the absence of income comparisons, happiness should be
negatively correlated to the average income of neighbors, reflecting a higher cost
of living. More generally, the average income in an area could be correlated with
other unobservable attributes of the location that also affect well-being, thus
3 For example, some of the supporters of income transparency in Norway see it as a fundamental
principle of democracy, while some opponents see it as a violation of privacy rights.
4 This was by no means the only negative consequence from income transparency that was debated.
For example, some detractors of open disclosure argued that the tax records could be used by criminals
to target rich individuals. However, in a letter to the Ministry of Justice, the Norwegian police noted
that their investigations ruled this out as a significant source for concern (Dagens Næringsliv, 2010).
5 There are some conflicting accounts about the evidence. See for instance Hagerty and Veenhoven
(2003), Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), Easterlin et al. (2010) and Easterlin (2017) on the effect of income
growth on happiness, and Senik (2004), Clark, Westergård-Nielsen and Kristensen (2009) and Deaton
and Stone (2013) on the effect of relative income on happiness.

Page 5 of 72

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE EFFECTS OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING

5

generating omitted-variable biases. We contribute to this literature by presenting novel evidence on the effects of relative income on happiness that relies on
a new identification approach, based on quasi-experimental variation in income
transparency.
This study also relates to Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015), who measured the
effect of the Norwegian disclosure of tax records on tax evasion. Disclosing tax
records may deter tax evasion by encouraging others with relevant information
about true tax liability to come forward and by threatening evaders with social
sanctions (see also Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018). Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen
(2015) found that the change in income disclosure increased reported income
among business owners by 2.7%, resulting in a total gain of 0.2% in income
tax revenues. This evidence confirms a benefit of disclosure, as alleged by its
supporters. We present evidence on an unintended effect, income comparisons,
as alleged by detractors of income transparency.
This work also relates to the study by Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez (2012) of
the effects of income transparency on job satisfaction. The researchers sent emails
to a random sample of university employees with information on how to access
a website that listed the wages of all employees working in the same university.
In a follow-up survey, they found that, for workers with below-median salaries
within their unit and position, having access to the website decreased satisfaction
with their wages and their jobs. Consistent with this finding, Rege and Solli
(2015) show evidence that the disclosure of tax records in Norway increased the
probability of quitting among workers with lower salaries. Their findings suggest
that some poor individuals may benefit from income transparency, because they
can find out if they are under-paid and look for a better job. On the contrary,
our evidence suggests that income transparency increased the well-being of richer
individuals at the expense of the well-being of poorer individuals.
Last, this study relates to a literature documenting how individuals misperceive
their positions in the income distribution and how providing objective information can correct these misperceptions (Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz, 2013;
Karadja, Mollerstrom, and Seim, 2017). These studies are based on artificial contexts in which researchers provide information through a survey. We contribute
to this literature by exploiting the variation in information access in a natural,
large-scale setting and by showing that correcting these misperceptions may affect
well-being.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes relevant details
about the disclosure policy. Section II presents the econometric specification and
the survey data. Section III presents the results. The last section concludes.

