Recruitment, effort, and retention effects of performance
contracts for civil servants: Experimental evidence from
Rwandan primary schools
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1972.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: C39, M52, O15

Page 1 of 78

Recruitment, effort, and retention effects of performance
contracts for civil servants: Experimental evidence from
Rwandan primary schools
By Clare Leaver, Owen Ozier, Pieter Serneels, and Andrew Zeitlin*
This paper reports on a two-tiered experiment designed to
separately identify the selection and effort margins of pay-forperformance (P4P). At the recruitment stage, teacher labor markets were randomly assigned to a ‘pay-for-percentile’ or fixed-wage
contract. Once recruits were placed, an unexpected, incentivecompatible, school-level re-randomization was performed, so that
some teachers who applied for a fixed-wage contract ended up being paid by P4P, and vice versa. By the second year of the study,
the within-year effort effect of P4P was 0.16 standard deviations
of pupil learning, with the total effect rising to 0.20 standard deviations after allowing for selection.
JEL: C93, I21, J45, M52, O15.
Keywords: pay-for-performance, selection, incentives, teachers,
field experiment.
The ability to recruit, elicit effort from, and retain civil servants is a central issue
for any government. This is particularly true in a sector such as education where
people—that is, human rather than physical resources—play a key role. Effective
teachers generate private returns for students through learning gains, educational
attainment, and higher earnings (Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff, 2014a,b), as well
* Leaver:
Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford and CEPR (email:
clare.leaver@bsg.ox.ac.uk). Ozier: Department of Economics, Williams College, World Bank Development Research Group, BREAD, and IZA (email: owen.ozier@williams.edu). Serneels: School of International Development, University of East Anglia, EGAP, and IZA (email: p.serneels@uea.ac.uk).
Zeitlin:
McCourt School of Public Policy, Georgetown University, and CGD (email:
andrew.zeitlin@georgetown.edu). We thank counterparts at REB and MINEDUC for advice and collaboration, and David Johnson for help with the design of student and teacher assessments. We are grateful
to the three anonymous referees, Katherine Casey, Jasper Cooper, Ernesto Dal Bó, Erika Deserranno,
David Evans, Dean Eckles, Frederico Finan, James Habyarimana, Caroline Hoxby, Macartan Humphreys,
Pamela Jakiela, Julien Labonne, David McKenzie, Ben Olken, Berk Özler, Cyrus Samii, Kunal Sen, Martin Williams, and audiences at BREAD, DfID, EDI, NBER, SIOE, and SREE for helpful comments. IPA
staff members Kris Cox, Stephanie De Mel, Olive Karekezi Kemirembe, Doug Kirke-Smith, Emmanuel
Musafiri, and Phillip Okull, and research assistants Claire Cullen, Robbie Dean, Ali Hamza, Gerald
Ipapa, and Saahil Karpe all provided excellent support. Financial support was provided by the U.K. Department for International Development (DfID) via the International Growth Centre and the Economic
Development and Institutions Programme, by Oxford University’s John Fell Fund, and by the World
Bank’s SIEF and REACH trust funds. Leaver is grateful for the hospitality of the Toulouse School of
Economics, 2018–2019. Research was conducted under Rwanda Ministry of Education permit number
MINEDUC/S&T/308/2015 and received IRB approval from the Rwanda National Ethics Committee
(protocol 00001497) and from Innovations for Poverty Action (protocol 1502). This study is registered
as AEA RCT Registry ID AEARCTR-0002565 (Leaver et al., 2018). The findings in this paper are the
opinions of the authors, and do not represent the opinions of the World Bank, its Executive Directors,
or the governments they represent. All errors and omissions are our own.

1

Page 2 of 78

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

as social returns through improved labor-market skills that drive economic growth
(Hanushek and Woessmann, 2012). And yet in varying contexts around the world,
governments struggle to maintain a skilled and motivated teacher workforce (Bold
et al., 2017).
One policy option in this context is pay-for-performance. These compensation
schemes typically reward teacher inputs such as presence and conduct in the
classroom, teacher value added based on student learning, or both (see, e.g.,
Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011b). In principle, they can address the
difficulty of screening for teacher quality ex ante (Staiger and Rockoff, 2010), as
well as the limited oversight of teachers on the job (Chaudhury et al., 2006).
Yet pay-for-performance divides opinion. Critics, drawing upon public administration, social psychology, and behavioral economics, argue that pay-forperformance could dampen the effort of workers (Bénabou and Tirole, 2003; Deci
and Ryan, 1985; Krepps, 1997). Concerns are that such schemes may: recruit the
wrong types, individuals who are “in it for the money”; lower effort by eroding
intrinsic motivation; and fail to retain the right types because good teachers become de-motivated and quit. By contrast, proponents point to classic contract
theory (Lazear, 2003; Rothstein, 2015) and evidence from private-sector jobs with
readily measurable output (Lazear, 2000) to argue that pay-for-performance will
have positive effects on both compositional and effort margins. Under this view,
such schemes: recruit the right types, individuals who anticipate performing well
in the classroom; raise effort by strengthening extrinsic motivation; and retain
the right types because good teachers feel rewarded and stay put.
This paper conducts the first prospective, randomized controlled trial designed
to identify both the compositional and effort margins of pay-for-performance. A
novel, two-tiered experiment separately identifies these effects. This is combined
with detailed data on applicants to jobs, the skills and motivations of actual
hires, and their performance over two years on the job, to evaluate the effects
of pay-for-performance on the recruitment, effort, and retention of civil servant
teachers.
At the center of this study is a pay-for-performance (hereafter P4P) contract,
designed jointly with the Rwanda Education Board and Ministry of Education.
Building on extensive consultations and a pilot year, this P4P contract rewards
the top 20 percent of teachers with extra pay using a metric that equally weights
learning outcomes in teachers’ classrooms alongside three measures of teachers’
inputs into the classroom (presence, lesson planning, and observed pedagogy).
The measure of learning used was based on a pay-for-percentile scheme that makes
student performance at all levels relevant to teacher rewards (Barlevy and Neal,
2012). The tournament nature of this contract allows us to compare it to a
fixed-wage (hereafter FW) contract that is equal in expected payout.
Our two-tiered experiment first randomly assigns labor markets to either P4P
or FW advertisements, and then uses a surprise re-randomization of experienced
contracts at the school level to enable estimation of pure compositional effects

Page 3 of 78

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

RECRUITMENT, EFFORT, AND RETENTION

3

within each realized contract type. The first stage was undertaken during recruitment for teacher placements for the 2016 school year. Teacher labor markets
are defined at the district by subject-family level. We conducted the experiment
in six districts (18 labor markets) which, together, cover more than half the upperprimary teacher hiring lines for the 2016 school year. We recruited into the study
all primary schools that received such a teacher to fill an upper-primary teaching
post (a total of 164 schools). The second stage was undertaken once 2016 teacher
placements had been finalized. Here, we randomly re-assigned each of these 164
study schools in their entirety to either P4P or FW contracts; all teachers who
taught core-curricular classes to upper-primary students, including both newly
placed recruits and incumbents, were eligible for the relevant contracts. We offered a signing bonus to ensure that no recruit, regardless of her belief about the
probability of winning, could be made worse off by the re-randomization and,
consistent with this, no one turned down their (re-)randomized contract. As advertised at the time of recruitment, incentives were in place for two years, enabling
us to study retention as well as to estimate higher-powered tests of effects using
outcomes from both years.
Our three main findings are as follows. First, on recruitment, advertised P4P
contracts did not change the distribution of measured teacher skill either among
applicants in general or among new hires in particular. This is estimated sufficiently precisely to rule out even small negative effects of P4P on measured skills.
Advertised P4P contracts did, however, select teachers who contributed less in
a framed Dictator Game played at baseline to measure intrinsic motivation. In
spite of this, teachers recruited under P4P were at least as effective in promoting learning as were those recruited under FW (holding experienced contracts
constant).
Second, in terms of incentivizing effort, placed teachers working under P4P
contracts elicited better performance from their students than teachers working
under FW contracts (holding advertised contracts constant). Averaging over the
two years of the study, the within-year effort effect of P4P was 0.11 standard
deviations of pupil learning and for the second year alone, the within-year effort
effect of P4P was 0.16 standard deviations. There is no evidence of a differential
impact of experienced contracts by type of advertisement.
In addition to teacher characteristics and student outcomes, we observe a range
of teacher behaviors. These behaviors corroborate our first finding: P4P recruits
performed no worse than the FW recruits in terms of their presence, preparation,
and observed pedagogy. They also indicate that the learning gains brought about
by those experiencing P4P contracts may have been driven, at least in part, by improved teacher presence and pedagogy. Teacher presence was 8 percentage points
higher among recruits who experienced the P4P contract compared to recruits
who experienced the FW contract. This is a sizeable impact given that baseline
teacher presence was close to 90 percent. And teachers who experienced P4P
were more effective in their classroom practices than teachers who experienced

Page 4 of 78

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

FW by 0.10 points, as measured on a 4-point scale.
Third, on retention, teachers working under P4P contracts were no more likely
to quit during the two years of the study than teachers working under FW contracts. There was also no evidence of differential selection-out on baseline teacher
characteristics by experienced contract, either in terms of skills or measured motivation. On the retention margin, we therefore find little evidence to support
claims made by either proponents or opponents of pay-for-performance.
To sum up, by the second year of the study, we estimate the within-year effort
effect of P4P to be 0.16 standard deviations of pupil learning, with the total effect
rising to 0.20 standard deviations after allowing for selection. Despite evidence of
lower intrinsic motivation among those recruited under P4P, these teachers were
at least as effective in promoting learning as were those recruited under FW. These
results support the view that pay-for-performance can improve effort while also
allaying fears of harmful effects on selection. Of course, we have studied a twoyear intervention—impacts of a long-term policy might be different, particularly
if P4P influences individuals’ early-career decisions to train as a teacher.
Our findings bring new experimental results on pay-for-performance to the literature on the recruitment of civil servants in low- and middle-income countries.
Existing papers have examined the impact of advertising higher unconditional
salaries and career-track motivations, with mixed results. In Mexico, Dal Bó,
Finan and Rossi (2013) find that higher base salaries attracted both skilled and
motivated applicants for civil service jobs. In Uganda, Deserranno (2019) finds
that the expectation of higher earnings discouraged pro-social applicants for village promoter roles, resulting in lower effort and retention. And in Zambia, Ashraf
et al. (forthcoming) find that emphasis on career-track motivations for community
health work, while attracting some applicants who were less pro-social, resulted in
hires of equal pro-sociality and greater talent overall, leading to improvements in
a range of health outcomes. By studying pay-for-performance and by separately
manipulating advertised and experienced contracts, we add evidence on the compositional and effort margins of a different, and widely debated, compensation
policy for civil servants.
How the teaching workforce changes in response to pay-for-performance is of
interest in high-income contexts as well. In the United States, there is a large
(but chiefly observational) literature on the impact of compensation on who enters
and leaves the teaching workforce. Well-known studies have simulated the consequences of dismissal policies (Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff, 2014b; Neal, 2011;
Rothstein, 2015) or examined the role of teachers’ outside options in labor supply
(Chingos and West, 2012). Recent work has examined the District of Columbia’s
teacher evaluation system, where financial incentives are linked to measures of
teacher performance (including student test scores): Dee and Wyckoff (2015) use
a regression discontinuity design to show that low-performing teachers were more
likely to quit voluntarily, while Adnot et al. (2017) confirm that these ‘quitters’
were replaced by higher-performers. In Wisconsin, a reform permitted approx-

Page 5 of 78

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

RECRUITMENT, EFFORT, AND RETENTION

5

imately half of the state’s school districts to introduce flexible salary schemes
that allow pay to vary with performance. In that setting, Biasi (2019) finds
that high-value-added teachers were more likely to move to districts with flexible
pay, and were less likely to quit, than their low-value-added counterparts. Our
prospective, experimental study of pay-for-performance contributes to this literature methodologically but also substantively since the Rwandan labor market
shares important features with high-income contexts.1
While our paper is not the first on the broader topic of incentive-based contracts
for teachers,2 we go to some length to address two challenges thought to be
important for policy implementation at scale. One is that the structure of the
incentive should not unfairly disadvantage any particular group (Barlevy and
Neal, 2012); the other is that the incentive should not be inappropriately narrow
(Stecher et al., 2018). We address the first issue by using a measure of learning
based on a pay-for-percentile scheme that makes student performance at all levels
relevant to teacher rewards, and the second by combining this with measures of
teachers’ inputs into the classroom to create a broad, composite metric. There is
a small but growing literature studying pay-for-percentile schemes in education:
Loyalka et al. (2019) in China, Gilligan et al. (forthcoming) in Uganda, and Mbiti,
Romero and Schipper (2018) in Tanzania. Our contribution is to compare the
effectiveness of contracts, P4P versus FW, that are based on a composite metric
and are budget neutral in salary.
A final, methodological contribution of the paper, in addition to the experimental design, is the way in which we develop a pre-analysis plan. In our registered
plan (Leaver et al., 2018), we pose three questions. What outcomes to study?
What hypotheses to test for each outcome? And how to test each hypothesis?
We answered the ‘what’ questions on the basis of theory, policy relevance, and
available data. With these questions settled, we then answered the ‘how’ question using blinded data. Specifically, we used a blinded dataset that allowed us to
learn about a subset of the statistical properties of our data without deriving hypotheses from realized treatment responses, as advocated by, e.g., Olken (2015).3
This approach achieves power gains by choosing from among specifications and
test statistics on the basis of simulated power, while protecting against the risk of
false positives that could arise if specifications were chosen on the basis of their
realized statistical significance. The spirit of this approach is similar to recent
work by Anderson and Magruder (2017) and Fafchamps and Labonne (2017).4
1 Notably, there is no public sector pay premium in Rwanda, which is unusual for a low-income country
and more typical of high-income countries (Finan, Olken and Pande, 2017). The 2017 Rwanda Labour
Force Survey includes a small sample of recent Teacher Training College graduates (aged below age 30).
Of these, 37 percent were in teaching jobs earning an average monthly salary of 43,431 RWF, while 15
percent were in non-teaching jobs earning a higher average monthly salary of 56,347 RWF—a private
sector premium of close to 30 percent (National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2017).
2 See, e.g., Imberman (2015) and Jackson, Rockoff and Staiger (2014) who provide a review.
3 We have not found prior examples of such blinding in economics. Humphreys, Sanchez de la Sierra
and van der Windt (2013) argue for, and undertake, a related approach with partial endline data in a
political science application.
4 In contrast to those two papers, we forsake the opportunity to undertake exploratory analysis because

