Going Negative at the Zero Lower Bound: The Effects of
Negative Nominal Interest Rates
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0848.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E32, E52, E44

Page 1 of 92

Disclosure Statement for “Going Negative at the Zero Lower Bound: The Effects of Negative
Nominal Interest Rates”
I declare that I did not receive any financial support for this particular research project. I declare
that I did not receive any support from any interested parties. I declare that I do not hold any paid
or unpaid positions as officer, director, or board member of relevant non-profit organizations or
profit-making entities. I declare that no other party had the right to review the paper prior to its
circulation. Sincerely,
Mauricio Ulate

Page 2 of 92

Going Negative at the Zero Lower Bound: The Effects of
Negative Nominal Interest Rates
By Mauricio Ulate∗
After the Great Recession several central banks started setting
negative nominal interest rates in an expansionary attempt, but
the effectiveness of this measure remains unclear. Negative rates
can stimulate the economy by lowering the rates that commercial
banks charge on loans, but they can also erode bank profitability
by squeezing deposit spreads. This paper studies the effects of negative rates in a new DSGE model where banks intermediate the
transmission of monetary policy. I use bank-level data to calibrate
the model and find that monetary policy in negative territory is
between 60% and 90% as effective as in positive territory.
JEL: E32, E44, E52, E58, G21
Keywords: Negative Interest Rates, ZLB, Monetary Policy, Bank
Profitability
A long tradition in macroeconomics has proposed the existence of a Zero Lower
Bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates. Intuitively, as cash offers a nominal
return of zero percent, agents should not be willing to pay others to keep their
money. However, recent experience from the aftermath of the Great Recession has
shown that negative nominal interest rates (NNIR) are possible: the central banks
of several advanced economies have used them as a policy tool.1 The Euro Area,
Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, and Japan all utilized NNIR at some point between 2014 and 2020 (Figure 1). Even if one abstracts from the Great Recession,
the global, secular decline in interest rates increases the likelihood of recessionary
episodes where nominal rates hit zero, as evidenced by the 2020 recession induced
by the Covid-19 pandemic. In this environment, understanding whether negative
rates can stimulate the economy is of great importance to academics and policy
makers.
∗ Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (email: mauricio.ulate@sf.frb.org). The views in this paper
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Yuriy Gorodnichenko and to Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare for their invaluable
guidance with this project. For useful comments I thank the referees, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, John
Williams, Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, Benjamin Faber, David Sraer, Benjamin Schoefer, Amir Kermani, Ludwig Straub, Tomasso Porzio, Michael Weber, David Baqaee, Ashley Lannquist, Jane Ryngaert,
Walker Ray, Rupal Kamdar, Lidia Smitkova, Byoungchan Lee, Hassan Afrouzi, Nick Sander, Alessandra
Fenizia, and participants in various seminars and conferences. All errors are my own.
1 Banks hold substantial reserves that would be costly to keep in cash, so they are willing to pay the
central bank to store their money. However, there is a limit to how much they are willing to pay; this
has been termed the physical lower bound (PLB; e.g. Cœuré 2016). This paper will not say much about
the level of the PLB, and focuses instead on the effectiveness of setting rates below zero but above the
PLB. While the experience of countries setting NNIR has expanded the traditional idea of monetary
policy space, it is important to acknowledge that the PLB is still a serious limitation to deeply negative
nominal interest rates.

1

Page 3 of 92

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

Two empirical regularities have been observed across countries setting NNIR:
retail deposit rates have remained at zero (failing to follow the policy rate into
negative territory), and lending rates have mostly declined. Given these facts,
it appears that negative rates can partially stimulate the economy through the
transmission mechanisms associated with the lending rate. However, commercial
bank profitability could be eroded by a decline in the spread between lending
and deposit rates. Bank profitability has therefore emerged as one of the most
pressing concerns when adopting NNIR.2 For example, Benoit Cœuré, who serves
on the Executive Board of the ECB, said in 2016: “A reduction in interest rates
could harm interest margins, and this could be even more pronounced when rates
enter negative territory, due to a potential Zero Lower Bound for retail deposit
rates.” This concern has been echoed in the business press. The Economist wrote
in 2016: “If interest rates go deeper into negative territory, profit margins will be
squeezed harder. And if banks are not profitable, they are less able to add to the
capital buffers that let them operate safely.”
In this paper, I study the effects of NNIR on the economy through the lens
of a new DSGE model with New Keynesian features where banks intermediate
the transmission of monetary policy. In the model, when the central bank sets
negative nominal policy rates, deposit rates remain at zero. The lending rate is
then affected by two forces. On one hand, the policy rate decline exerts downward
pressure on the loan rate. This is the bank lending channel of monetary policy,
which tends to stimulate the economy. On the other hand, the erosion of bank
profitability brought about by the decline in the deposit spread will, over time,
be transmitted to a decline in bank equity. This leads to upward pressure on
the lending rate. I will refer to this as the net-worth channel of monetary policy,
which has a contractionary effect. The equilibrium behavior of the lending rate
depends on the relative importance of the two channels.
The model features three main frictions affecting the banking sector. First,
banks have some monopoly power in lending and managing deposits. As a result,
the deposit rate that financial intermediaries pay households is different from the
policy rate that the central bank pays on reserves. The policy rate also differs
from the rate that borrowers pay commercial banks for loans. This friction is
essential for the bank lending channel, since banks are only able to lower their
lending rate (despite the fact that their funding costs are constant, i.e., stuck
at the ZLB) because of the existence of a profit margin. The second friction
is that, after a shock, banks cannot immediately regain their optimal level of
equity. Instead, they accumulate capital slowly, through retained earnings. The
third friction is that bank equity matters for lending. In particular, banks care
about their level of leverage, and they are reluctant to lend when this variable
is too high. Frictions two and three lead to the existence of a relevant bank
2 Both central banks that implemented negative rates and those that did not have cited bank profitability as a concern: Bank of Japan (2016), Danmarks Nationalbank (2015), Bean (2013), and Jackson
(2015).

Page 4 of 92

GOING NEGATIVE AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND

200

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

3

ECB: Deposit Facility Rate
DN: Certificates of Deposit

SR: Repo Rate

0

100

BoJ: Policy Rate

-100

Interest Rates, in basis points

SNB: Sight Deposits

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Date

Figure 1. Negative rates experience
Note: This figure shows the rates paid by the Central Bank of Denmark (DN), the European Central
Bank (ECB), the Central Bank of Sweden (SR), the Swiss National Bank (SNB), and the Bank of Japan
(BoJ), in basis points, between 2010 and 2020. The concept of interest rate used for each region is
described in the legend. The data was gathered directly from each central bank.

net-worth channel. The combination of the stimulative bank lending channel and
the contractionary bank net-worth channel implies that setting NNIR has both
beneficial and detrimental effects, the relative importance of which determines
the overall usefulness of setting a negative policy rate.
I start by developing a static model of the banking sector that contains only the
first friction (bank monopolistic competition). In this model there is a continuum
of commercial banks. Each individual bank receives an exogenous level of equity
and obtains deposits from consumers. With the resources available after combining their equity and deposits, commercial banks can either provide loans to firms
or keep reserves at the central bank. Banks face an upward-sloping deposit supply
curve and a downward-sloping loan demand curve. Deposit supply and loan demand for each individual bank arise from the fact that depositors and borrowers
have CES preferences across banks. The aggregate amounts of deposits supplied
and loans demanded are taken as given for now, as this is a partial equilibrium
exercise. Additionally, the model assumes that if a bank sets a negative deposit
rate then it obtains no deposits, as consumers could simply save in cash.

Page 5 of 92

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

In this context, there exists a positive, but small, threshold for the policy rate,
denoted by ι̃, at which the behavior of banks changes. I will refer to the case
where the policy rate is above ι̃ as “Regime 1.” In this regime, because of the
monopolistic competition setup, each bank sets its loan rate as a mark-up on the
policy rate and its deposit rate as a mark-down on it. Consequently, changes in
the policy rate are fully passed through to the loan and deposit rates. It will be
useful to define the loan spread as the difference between the loan and the policy
rate, and the deposit spread as the difference between the policy and the deposit
rate. Bank return on equity (ROE) can then be expressed as the sum of three
terms: the policy rate, the loan spread times the loan-to-equity ratio, and the
deposit spread times the deposit-to-equity ratio. In Regime 1 the spreads do not
change with the policy rate, and so ROE moves one-for-one with the policy rate.
When the policy rate is below ι̃, denoted “Regime 2,” banks would like to set
a negative deposit rate to earn their usual deposit spread. However, if they do so
they lose all deposits, and so they set a zero deposit rate instead.3 The loan rate
is still set as a mark-up on the policy rate, since holding reserves is the marginal
use of bank funds. Therefore, a decline in the policy rate is still fully transmitted
into the lending rate, giving rise to the stimulative bank lending channel of NNIR
mentioned above. In this regime, the loan spread remains constant, but the
deposit spread falls with the policy rate. Consequently, ROE falls more than onefor-one with the policy rate. In this static model, the steep decline in ROE that
occurs in Regime 2 after a cut in the policy rate has no perverse effects on the
lending rate, due to the lack of dynamics and the absence of additional frictions;
the contractionary bank net-worth channel is not operational yet.
The static model has four testable predictions. First, in Regime 2 the deposit
rate stops reacting to the policy rate. Second, the lending rate continues to fall
with the policy rate even in Regime 2. Third, bank ROE is affected by a cut in
the policy rate more in Regime 2 than in Regime 1. Fourth, the higher sensitivity
of bank return on equity to the policy rate in Regime 2 is more pronounced for
banks that rely heavily on retail deposits for funding. I use bank-level data from
more than five thousand banks in 10 advanced regions (i.e., the five advanced
regions that have set negative rates and five other comparable advanced regions,
including the United States, that have set very low rates) to test these predictions.
The first step is to estimate the threshold level ι̃. A variety of tests confirm the
existence of a change in the slope of the response of both the deposit rate and ROE
to the policy rate when the policy rate is around 50 basis points. Consequently,
I set ι̃ = 0.5%. I then test the four predictions and find strong support for them
in the data. The prediction that the loan rate continues to fall with the policy
rate in Regime 2 is especially useful for differentiating between my model and
alternative ones that propose that negative rates cannot be expansionary.
3 There exists a second threshold i < 0 below which it becomes too costly for banks to accept deposits
that earn a negative spread; in that region some banks stop receiving deposits. I postpone this discussion
to Section I.

