Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization:
Evidence from a Field Experiment
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1777.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: D72, L82, L86

Page 1 of 116

Disclosure Statement – Ro’ee Levy
September 2020
This research project, “Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization: Evidence from a Field
Experiment”, is supported by the ISPS Field Experiment's Initiative, the Tobin Center for
Economic Policy, the Yale Department of Economics, the Yale Program in Applied Economics
and Policy, the Yale School of Management, and Professor David Rand.
The experimental study was reviewed by the Yale University Institutional Review Board and
determined to be exempt.
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper.
Ro’ee Levy
MIT

Page 2 of 116

Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization:
Evidence from a Field Experiment
Ro’ee Levy∗
September 18, 2020

Abstract
Does the consumption of ideologically congruent news on social media exacerbate polarization? I estimate the effects of social media news exposure by conducting a large field experiment randomly offering
participants subscriptions to conservative or liberal news outlets on Facebook. I collect data on the causal
chain of media effects: subscriptions to outlets, exposure to news on Facebook, visits to online news sites,
and sharing of posts, as well as changes in political opinions and attitudes. Four main findings emerge.
First, random variation in exposure to news on social media substantially affects the slant of news sites
individuals visit. Second, exposure to counter-attitudinal news decreases negative attitudes toward the
opposing political party. Third, in contrast to the effect on attitudes, I find no evidence that the political
leanings of news outlets affect political opinions. Fourth, Facebook’s algorithm is less likely to supply
individuals with posts from counter-attitudinal outlets, conditional on individuals subscribing to them.
Together, the results suggest that social media algorithms may limit exposure to counter-attitudinal news
and thus increase polarization.

JEL Codes: D72, L82, L86, O33

∗ Massachusetts Institute of Technology, roeelevy@mit.edu. I am deeply grateful to Ebonya Washington, Joseph Shapiro, and Dean

Karlan for their guidance and support throughout this project. I thank the editor and three anonymous referees for their insightful
comments. I also thank Hunt Allcot, Eran Amsalem, Ian Ball, Dirk Bergemann, Leonardo Bursztyn, Alex Coppock, Oren Danieli,
Eduardo Fraga, Matthew Gentzkow, Matthew Graham, Alexey Makarin, Martin Mattsson, Brendan J. Nyhan, Rohini Pande, David
Rand, Oren Sarig, David Schönholzer, Katherine Wagner, Jaya Y. Wen, and Mor Zoran, along with seminar participants at Bar Ilan,
Berkeley, Booth, Cornell, IDC, Haifa, Hebrew University, Microsoft Research, NBER Digitization, Northwestern, NYU, Tel Aviv, UCLA
Anderson, Yale, and the ZEW conference on the economics of IT, for their valuable comments. Financial support from the ISPS
Field Experiment’s Initiative, the Tobin Center for Economic Policy, the Yale Department of Economics, the Yale Program in Applied
Economics and Policy, the Yale School of Management, and David Rand is greatly appreciated. All errors are my own. The experiment
is registered at the AEA RCT registry (ID 0002713).

Page 3 of 116

In 2019, more than 70% of American adults consumed news on social media, compared to fewer than one
in eight Americans in 2008.1 Based on Pew surveys, Facebook is the dominant social media platform for
news consumption, and “among millennials, Facebook is far and away the most common source for news
about government and politics” (PEW, 2015, p. 8). As social media becomes a major news source, there
are growing concerns that individuals are exposed to more pro-attitudinal news, defined as news matching
their ideology, and as a result, polarization increases (Sunstein, 2017).
In this paper, I test whether these concerns are warranted. I analyze the effects of exposure to pro- and
counter-attitudinal news outlets by conducting a large online field experiment randomizing exposure to
news on Facebook, and by collecting survey, browsing, and social media data.
To motivate the experiment, I first provide descriptive statistics on online news consumption. I show that
news sites visited through social media, and specifically Facebook, are associated with more segregated,
pro-attitudinal, and extreme news, compared to other news sites visited.
I recruited American Facebook users to the experiment using Facebook ads. After completing a baseline
survey, participants were randomly assigned to a liberal treatment, a conservative treatment, or a control
group. Participants in the liberal and conservative treatments were asked to subscribe to up to four liberal or
conservative outlets on Facebook, respectively (e.g., MSNBC or Fox News), by clicking a “Like Page” button
embedded at the end of the survey.2 Remarkably, in each treatment, approximately half the participants
complied by subscribing to at least one outlet. When individuals subscribe to an outlet on Facebook, posts
shared by the outlet may subsequently appear in their Facebook feed. A post usually contains the story’s
headline and often includes a link to the full news story on the outlet’s website.
I designed the experiment to have high external validity. A nudge offering subscriptions to outlets is very
common on social media and participants could have subscribed to any of these outlets, at no cost, without
the intervention. Besides the offer, the experiment did not directly intervene in any behavior. The news
supplied to participants was the actual news provided by leading media outlets during the study period.
Facebook’s algorithm determined which of the posts shared by the outlets appeared in the participants’
Facebook feeds. Finally, participants decided whether to skip, read, click, or share posts. As a result, the
effect of the intervention is almost identical to the experience of millions of Americans who subscribe to
popular news outlets on Facebook.
I estimate the effect of the intervention on exposure to news in the Facebook feed, news sites visited, news
shared, political opinions, and affective polarization, defined as negative attitudes toward the opposing
political party. Affective polarization is a primary outcome of interest since this measure of polarization has
been increasing (Iyengar and Krupenkin, 2018), and there are concerns over its implications for governance,
accountability of elected officials, and even labor markets (Iyengar et al., 2019).
To measure subscriptions to outlets on Facebook and posts shared, I asked participants to log in to the
survey using their Facebook account. To measure exposure to news in the Facebook feed and visits to news
sites, I developed a Google Chrome extension and asked a subset of participants who took the survey on a
computer using Chrome to install it. To estimate the effect on opinions and attitudes, I invited participants
to an endline survey approximately two months after the intervention. My sample is composed of 37,494
participants who completed the baseline survey. 34,592 of those participants provided access to the posts
they shared for at least two weeks, 1,835 installed the extension for at least two weeks, and 17,635 took the
endline survey.
This paper has four main findings. First, exposure to news on social media substantially affects online
news consumption. Following increased exposure to posts from the randomly offered outlets, participants
visited the websites of the outlets, even when the outlets did not match their ideology. Visiting the websites
had a substantial effect on the mean slant of participants’ overall online news consumption. The difference
between the intention-to-treat (ITT) effects of the liberal and conservative treatments on the slant of news
1 2008 figure is based on the Pew Research Center 2008 Biennial Media Consumption Survey. The 2019 figure is based on the Pew
Research Center American Trends Panel Wave 51, July 2019.
2 To simplify terminology, throughout the paper I will describe the action of “liking” a page of a news organization as subscribing
to an outlet on Facebook.

1

Page 4 of 116

sites visited in the two weeks following the intervention is 14% of the difference in the slant of sites visited
by liberals and conservatives in the control group.
Various economic theories explain why individuals optimally prefer news that matches their ideology
(Gentzkow, Shapiro and Stone, 2015). However, I find that news consumption strongly responds to an
exogenous shock to the feed, meaning that individuals often consume news incidentally, and do not fully
re-optimize their browsing behavior to keep the slant of the news sites they visit constant. The results imply
that social media algorithms can substantially alter news consumption habits and that while social media is
associated with pro-attitudinal news, individuals are willing to engage with counter-attitudinal news when
it is made more accessible on social media.
My second finding is that exposure to counter-attitudinal news decreases affective polarization, compared to
pro-attitudinal news. I construct an affective polarization index measuring attitudes toward political parties. The index includes questions such as how participants feel toward their own party and the opposing
party, i.e., a “feeling thermometer”. When estimating the effects on polarization, I redefine the treatments
as pro- and counter-attitudinal. For example, a counter-attitudinal treatment is a liberal treatment assigned
to a conservative participant or a conservative treatment assigned to a liberal participant. The ITT and
treatment-on-treated (TOT) effects of the counter-attitudinal treatment on the affective polarization index,
compared to the pro-attitudinal treatment, are -0.03 and -0.06 standard deviations, respectively. The TOT
effect should be interpreted as the effect on individuals who subscribe to new outlets when nudged to subscribe. Comparing each treatment to the control group suggests that the effect on polarization is driven by
the counter-attitudinal treatment but this result should be interpreted cautiously since participants in the
control group were more likely to complete the endline survey (there is no differential attrition between the
two treatment arms).
I compare the results to existing benchmarks by focusing on the feeling thermometer questions. The experiment’s ITT and TOT effects decreased the difference between participants’ feelings toward their own party
and the opposing party by 0.58 and 0.96 degrees on a 0-100 scale over two months, respectively. For comparison, based on the American National Election Survey (ANES), this measure of affective polarization
increased by 3.83-10.52 degrees between 1996 and 2016.3
Third, in contrast to the effect on attitudes, I do not find evidence that the slant of news outlets affects political opinions. The effect of the liberal and conservative treatments on a political opinions index focusing
on issues and political figures covered during the study period is small in magnitude, precisely estimated,
and not statistically significant.
The paper’s fourth finding is that Facebook’s algorithm may limit exposure to counter-attitudinal news. I
show that participants in the counter-attitudinal treatment were exposed to substantially fewer posts from
the outlets they subscribed to in the intervention, compared to participants in the pro-attitudinal treatment.
Combined, the results paint a complicated picture. On the one hand, Facebook’s algorithm seems to filter
counter-attitudinal news, probably since it attempts to personalize news based on the user’s behavior and
perceived interests. While it is not possible to estimate the effect of specific posts filtered by the algorithm,
I show that exposure to counter-attitudinal news decreases affective polarization. This suggests that social
media algorithms may be increasing polarization. On the other hand, this paper also shows that individuals are willing to engage with counter-attitudinal news, and social media platforms provide a setting
where a subtle nudge can substantially diversify news consumption and consequently decrease affective
polarization.
This paper contributes to the literature on social media and news consumption. In his seminal book “The
Filter Bubble,” Eli Pariser warned that the “era of personalization is here” (Pariser, 2011, p. 19). However,
recent reviews concluded that “we lack convincing evidence of algorithmic filter bubbles in politics” (Guess
et al., 2018, p. 12). Papers in this literature typically estimate segregation in online news based on crosssectional analysis of browsing behavior (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2011; Flaxman, Sharad and Rao, 2016;
3 The increase in polarization depends on the weights and the respondents included in the sample. When using the ANES faceto-face sample for consistency (Boxell, Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2018), the increase is 3.83. When including also the 2016 web sample
(Iyengar et al., 2019), the increase is 10.52. The ANES top-codes the thermometer at 97 degrees. The results are almost exactly the same
when I top-code the results.

2

Page 5 of 116

Peterson, Shared and Iyengar, 2019; Guess, 2020). Since they lack social media data, these papers cannot
measure segregation within one’s social media feed. One exception is a paper analyzing Facebook data,
arguing that exposure to counter-attitudinal news shared by friends is mostly limited by individual choices
and not by algorithmic ranking (Bakshy, Messing and Adamic, 2015). The paper analyzes large data but
does not exploit exogenous variation. I advance the literature by generating experimental variation in
subscriptions to outlets and collecting data on exposure to posts from those outlets. This allows me to
decompose the mechanisms limiting exposure to counter-attitudinal news and demonstrate the existence
of a filter bubble, i.e., that Facebook’s algorithm is more likely to expose individuals to news matching their
ideology, conditional on subscription.
My findings contribute to the literature on social media and polarization by generating variation in the
main mechanism through which social media is suspected to increase polarization: the distance between
individuals’ ideology and the slant of their news consumption. Related papers show that the Internet
and Facebook may increase polarization (Lelkes, Sood and Iyengar, 2015; Allcott et al., 2020), but based
on demographics, they may not be the primary driver in the rise of polarization (Boxell, Gentzkow and
Shapiro, 2018).4 These papers focus on the reduced-form effect of social media and do not identify the
causal effect of pro- or counter-attitudinal news. Indeed, a recent review argues that “it is far from clear
... that partisan news actually causes affective polarization” (Iyengar et al., 2019, p. 135). To the best of
my knowledge, this paper provides the first experimental evidence that counter-attitudinal news decreases
affective polarization and thus demonstrates that nudges diversifying social media news exposure can be
effective.
This study also contributes to a well-established literature on media persuasion by randomly assigning
subscriptions to news outlets. Survey experiments (e.g., Coppock, Ekins and Kirby 2018) and papers with
quasi-experimental designs (e.g., DellaVigna and Kaplan 2007) find that individuals are persuaded by the
news they consume.5 While in many contexts field experiments are considered the gold standard for estimating causal effects, field experiments estimating media effects are not common. One notable exception
is a study randomizing subscriptions to the Washington Post and Washington Times, which does not find
an effect on opinions but is limited by a relatively small sample size (Gerber, Karlan and Bergan, 2009).
This paper studies a different setting, social media, and shows how the unique features of this setting affect
news exposure. Focusing on social media also allows me to analyze engagement with news and quantify
the effect of news exposure.
Methodologically, this paper contributes to a growing literature conducting online media-related experiments (Bail et al., 2018; Jo, 2018; Chen and Yang, 2019; Mosquera, Odunowo and Mcnamara, 2019; Allcott
et al., 2020) by demonstrating how an experiment can exploit social media’s existing infrastructure to gradually distribute news to participants in a natural setting. In contrast to most online experiments, participants were not asked to consume any content or continue complying with the treatment over time, not
did they receive frequent reminders of the experiment. The natural, unobtrusive intervention means that
it is unlikely that experimenter effects drive the study’s result. To precisely detect the small effects that are
expected as a result of a subtle intervention, I collect a sample size that is an order of magnitude larger than
most other related experiments.

I

Background: Facebook

This study focuses on Facebook since it is the dominant social media platform, used by seven out of ten
American adults. Most of these users visit Facebook several times a day,6 and the platform accounts for
45% of all time spent on social media (Williamson, 2018). Despite its prominence, Facebook has been understudied, especially compared to Twitter (Guess et al., 2018).
4 Other studies estimating the effect of social media on political behavior include Bursztyn et al. (2019), Müller and Schwarz (2019),
and Enikolopov, Makarin and Petrova (2020). See Zhuravskaya, Petrova and Enikolopov (2020) for a recent review.
5 Other studies estimating media effects on political outcomes include Chiang and Knight (2011), Gentzkow, Shapiro and Sinkinson
(2011), Durante, Pinotti and Tesei (2019), and Okuyama (2019). See Strömberg (2015) for a review.
6 Facebook usage is based on the Pew Research Center January 2019 Core Trends Survey.

3

