Antitrust Policies and Profitability in Non-Tradable Sectors
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0316.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
25-Oct-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Besley, Timothy; London School of Economics and Political Science,
Department of Economics
Limodio, Nicola; Universita Bocconi Dipartimento di Finanza,
Fontana , Nicola; London School of Economics and Political Science,
Economics
Keywords: L40, D40, antitrust

Page 1 of 49

August 31st 2020
Disclosure State for Tim Besley for
“Anti-Trust Policies and Firm Profitability in Non-Traded Sectors”
In addition to my position at LSE I have a part-time appointment as a Commissioner on the UK National
Infrastructure Commission. I serve on the Executive Committee of the International Economic
Association and the Royal Economic Society.
I have recent consulting assignments and speaking engagements with
-

IMF
Boston Consulting
World Bank
HSBC

I have received grants from:
-

Spinoza Foundation
ESRC
Mastercard foundation (provision of credit card data)

Yours faithfully,

Tim Besley

Page 2 of 49

August 31st 2020
Disclosure State for Nicola Fontana for
“Anti-Trust Policies and Firm Profitability in Non-Traded Sectors”
I have received grants from:
•
•

ESRC Doctoral Training Centre Studentship
Research Training Support Grant (LSE)

Yours faithfully,

Nicola Fontana

Page 3 of 49

August 31st 2020
Disclosure State for Nicola Limodio for
“Anti-Trust Policies and Firm Profitability in Non-Traded Sectors”
I have received grants from:
-

The International Growth Center at the LSE
The Private Enterprise Development in Low Income Countries (PEDL) is a joint research initiative
of the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR)
The World Bank Research Budget

Yours faithfully,

Nicola Limodio

Page 4 of 49

Antitrust Policies and Profitability in Non-Tradable
Sectors *
By T IMOTHY B ESLEY†

N ICOLA F ONTANA‡

N ICOLA L IMODIO§

Firms in tradable sectors are more likely to be subject to external competition to limit market power while non-tradable firms are more dependent on domestic policies and institutions. This paper combines an
antitrust index available for multiple countries with firm-level data from
Orbis covering more than 10 million firms from 90 countries, covering
20 sectors over 10 years and finds that profit margins of firms operating
in non-tradable sectors are significantly lower in countries with stronger
antitrust policies compared to firms operating in tradable sectors. The
results are robust to a wide variety of empirical specifications.
JEL: D22, E02, L44
Keywords: Competition, Antitrust, Institutions
This paper examines how institutions designed for enforcing competition in markets
affect economic performance. A central role of the state in building a market economy is
to guarantee that there are benefits of competition to ensure static and dynamic efficiency.
But the way that this is done varies across sectors of the economy. Those sectors that
are subject to international competition have natural exposure to competition if trade
is liberalized, while those that are not are more dependent on domestic policies that
encourage entry and limit the abuse of market power.
The core empirical implication that we explore here, is that the institutions that affect competition policy should have a heterogenous effect on tradable and non-tradable
sectors. To investigate this, we require firm-level data. Hence, we have assembled a
dataset of 10 million firms covering 20 sectors across 90 countries over a period of 10
years (2006-2015) based on Orbis (2016). To measure antitrust policy, we exploit the
Total Scope Index Score constructed by Hylton and Deng (2007) which is based on assessments of competition law made by legal experts and practitioners. This is available
for a wide variety of countries/economies.
Our core findings exploit variation in antitrust both across and within different sectors
and countries. Using the Orbis profitability measure, we show that profitability is related
to an index of antitrust policy but more strongly in non-tradable sectors. The results that
* We are grateful to the editor and referees for helpful comments. We also thank John Van Reenen and seminar
participants at LSE for their useful suggestions and Azhar Hussain and Federico Lenzi for research assistance. Paul
Horsler gave use valuable assistance with the Orbis data. We are responsible for all errors.
† Corresponding Author, Department of Economics and STICERD, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, WC2A 2AE London, UK. t.besley@lse.ac.uk
‡ Department of Economics and Center for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, WC2A 2AE London, UK. n.fontana@lse.ac.uk
§ Department of Finance, BAFFI CAREFIN and IGIER, Bocconi University, Via Sarfatti 25, 20136, Milan, Italy,
nicola.limodio@unibocconi.it

1

Page 5 of 49

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

we present are robust to a variety of alternative specifications.
Our baseline results are based on a cross-country and cross-sector analysis where we
show evidence of systematic heterogeneity in the relationship between antitrust policies
and firm outcomes. We show that, in countries with stronger antitrust policies, the profit
margins of firms operating in non-tradable sectors are significantly lower than those operating in tradable sectors. The results are economically meaningful suggesting, for example, that if China adopted France’s antitrust index, we would expect a 19% fall in the
average profit margin. We also find that concentration is lower in non-tradable sectors
when antitrust policy is strong. In contrast, changes in antitrust are associated with negligible effects on tradable sectors, in line with the hypothesis that international markets
serve to discipline firms in such sectors.
These findings underline the limits of trade liberalization as a means of promoting
competition since, in our sample, about 82% of firms operate in non-tradable sectors.
So, without rigorous competition policy, there may be limited scope to introduce more
competition into important sectors such as wholesale, retail, transportation, construction,
and real estate.
Our results are consistent with the idea that institutions matter, in the form of competition law and enforcement, for sectors of the economy where international competition is
weak. Moreover, the finding in our paper is specific to the antitrust measures; other measures of “good institutions” do not appear correlated with profitability in the non-tradable
sectors of the economy. It therefore adds a new dimension to debates about how a strong
institutional environment can be conducive to growth and development beyond the previous focus on such things as lowering the threat of expropriation (La Porta et al., 1998),
minimizing rent extraction (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001) or securing legal
protection and infrastructure (Besley and Persson, 2011).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses related
literature. In section II, we present the conceptual framework that motivates the test that
we use. Section III presents the data and section IV presents the core empirical results.
In section V, we discuss a key concern about interpreting the results along with some
robustness checks. Section VI contains some concluding remarks.
I. Related Literature

The paper is related to an emerging body of literature on antitrust policy and its consequences. Our findings complement recent work studying the role of antitrust and firm
margins in the United States (Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2017, De Loecker, Eeckhout and
Unger, 2020), that we extend to additional countries and across sectors with different
degrees of tradability. Debates about the role of antitrust and its ability to affect firm
behavior are long-standing. Block, Nold and Sidak (1981) show that antitrust efforts and
penalties generate a deterrent effect on cartels, that lead firms to set a price between the
competitive the oligopolistic price. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) find that the profitability and concentration of US industries increased in the past two decades due to decreasing domestic competition, in line with Grullon, Larkin and Michaely (2019). These
results are consistent with our antitrust measure showing a decline in the stringency of

