How well targeted are soda taxes?
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2017-1898.R4
Manuscript Type: Administrator
Keywords: D12, H31, I18

Page 1 of 83

Martin O'Connell
IFS
7 Ridgmount Street
London WC1E 7AE
UK
8 July 2020
O’Connell's time on this project was funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under
ERC-2015-AdG-694822, the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) under the Centre
for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy (CPP), RES-544-28-0001, and the Open
Research Area (ESRC), ES/N011562/1 and the British Academy under
pf160093. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessary reflect the
views of the EU or UK governments. The author declares that he has no additional relevant
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Martin O’Connell

Page 2 of 83

Rachel Griffith
IFS
7 Ridgmount Street
London WC1E 7AE
UK
6 July 2019
Griffith's time on this project was funded by the European Research Council under ERC-2015-AdG694822 and by the Economic and Social Research Council under ES/T014334/1. The views expressed
are those of the authors and do not necessary reflect the views of the EU or UK governments. The
author declares that she has no additional relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.

Rachel Griffith

Page 3 of 83

Pierre Dubois
Toulouse School of Economics
Universite Toulouse 1 Capitole
1 Esplanade de l’université
31080 TOULOUSE
France
2 July 2020
Dubois' time on this project was funded by the European Research Council under ERC-2015AdG-694822 and by the Economic and Social Research Council under ANR-ESRC ORA grant
number ES/ N011562/1. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessary
reflect the views of the EU or UK governments. The author declares that he has no
additional relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in
this paper.

Pierre Dubois

Page 4 of 83

How well targeted are soda taxes?
By Pierre Dubois, Rachel Griffith and Martin O’Connell∗
Soda taxes aim to reduce excessive sugar consumption. We assess who are most impacted by soda taxes. We estimate demand
using micro longitudinal data covering on-the-go purchases, and
exploit the panel dimension to estimate individual specific preferences. We relate these preferences and counterfactual predictions
to individual characteristics and show that soda taxes are relatively
effective at targeting the sugar intake of the young, are less successful at targeting the intake of those with high total dietary sugar,
and are unlikely to be strongly regressive especially if consumers
benefit from averted internalities.
JEL: D12, H31, I18
Keywords: preference heterogeneity, discrete choice demand, passthrough, soda tax
Sugar consumption is far in excess of medically recommended levels in much
of the developed world. Excess sugar consumption is linked with a range of dietrelated diseases, including diabetes, cancers and heart disease, and is thought to
be particularly detrimental to children (WHO (2015)). Soft drinks products are a
leading contributor to dietary sugar (see CDC (2016)). Taxes on these products
(soda taxes) have been proposed as a way to reduce sugar consumption for individuals whose consumption generates costs that are borne by others (externalities)
or for whom any future costs of consumption are large and partially ignored at
the point of consumption (internalities). A growing number of jurisdictions have
adopted soda taxes.1 Soft drinks are a particularly large contributor to dietary
sugar among the young, those with high overall dietary sugar, and youth from
low income households, and policymakers have identified these groups as the ones
whose behavior they would most like to change.2 The impact of soda taxes, and
∗ Dubois: Toulouse School of Economics, pierre.dubois@tse-fr.eu; Griffith: Institute for Fiscal Studies and University of Manchester, rgriffith@ifs.org.uk; O’Connell: Institute for Fiscal Studies, martin o@ifs.org.uk. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the European Research
Council (ERC) under ERC-2015-AdG-694822, the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) under
the Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy (CPP), grant number ES/T014334/1, the
Open Research Area (ORA) grant number ES/I012222/1, ANR-10-ORAR-009-01 and ES/N011562/1,
ANR-17-EURE-0010 (Investissements d'Avenir program) and the British Academy under pf160093. Data
supplied by Kantar. The use of these data in this work does not imply the endorsement of Kantar in
relation to the interpretation or analysis of the data. All errors and omissions remained the responsibility
of the authors.
1 As of December 2019 43 countries and 8 US cities had soda taxes in clear (GFRP (GFRP)).
2 See, for example, Han and Powell (2013), Cavadini, Siega-Riz and Popkin (2000), CDC (2016) and
Public Health England (2015), and Online Appendix A.1 where we provide evidence of this based on
dietary intake data from the UK and the US. As an example of policymakers targeting these groups,
Public Health England (2017) says on p.4: “In August 2016, government set out its approach to reduce
the prevalence of childhood obesity in Childhood obesity: a plan for action. A key commitment in the

1

Page 5 of 83

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

whether ultimately they are successful in improving welfare, will depend crucially
on how demand responses vary across individuals from these targeted groups.
Our contribution in this paper is to assess whether soda taxes are effective
at lowering the sugar consumption of individuals that policy has targeted (i.e.
the young, high sugar consumers and the poor). We focus on the important
but understudied on-the-go segment of the market. We use novel data on UK
individuals to estimate a model of consumer choice, uncover individual specific
preferences, and simulate the impacts of a soda tax. We show that the tax does
a good job at targeting young consumers and those from low income households,
but not individuals from households with high total dietary sugar. The economic
burden of the tax is moderately higher for individuals from lower income households; however, we also find that they reduce sugar consumption by more, so this
leaves open the possibility that these offset the economic burden. Relative to the
existing literature we make two main advances.
First, we study purchase decisions made by individuals for immediate consumption on-the-go. Studying the on-the-go segment is important for a number
of reasons. Firstly, consumption on-the-go is common – close to half of sugar from
soft drinks is obtained outside the home. Yet there is little evidence on choice
behavior on-the-go, with the bulk of the literature focusing on purchases made
in supermarkets and brought into the home for future consumption. Secondly,
observing individual on-the-go purchases provides an excellent opportunity for
identification of individual preferences; in contrast to information on household
level at-home purchases, purchases and consumption are closely aligned and individual preference estimates can be obtained without the need to place strong
restrictions on the intra-household preference structure (see, for example, Adams
et al. (2014)) Thirdly, the on-the-go data contain information on teenagers and
young adults, who are explicit targets of the soda taxes, but who are typically
not identified as a distinct group in data based on household purchases.
Second, we model consumer preferences as individual level parameters that
we estimate, rather than modeling them using the standard random coefficient
approach (where they are treated as random effects drawn from a known distribution). This is important because it allows us to better assess how well targeted
a tax is and whether it is regressive. In particular, it means we avoid placing
restrictions on (or ruling out) correlation between consumer level preferences and
attributes (including purchase behavior for other goods). As a result we are able
to directly relate individual level preferences and predictions of the impact of the
tax to consumer attributes, and can therefore assess precisely which individuals respond to the tax and on whom the economic burden of the tax falls most
plan was to launch a broad, structured sugar reduction program to remove sugar from everyday products.
... Although the program focuses on foods consumed by children, the reality is that families eat the same
foods. The program will therefore help all family members to reduce their sugar consumption, thereby
reducing the risk of weight gain and the consequences of this to their health. It will also help to reduce
health inequalities, as sugar consumption, and the rates of obesity in children, tend to be highest in the
most deprived.”

