The effect of leaded gasoline on elderly mortality: Evidence
from regulatory exemptions
Journal: American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
Manuscript ID AEJPol-2019-0654.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I00, I18, Q53

Page 1 of 95

The effect of leaded gasoline on elderly mortality:
Evidence from regulatory exemptions
Alex Hollingsworth and Ivan Rudik∗
July 3, 2020
Abstract
Leaded gasoline is still used globally for aviation and automotive racing. Exploiting
regulatory exemptions and a novel quasi-experiment, we find that leaded gasoline use
in racing increases ambient lead, elevated blood lead rates, and elderly mortality. The
mortality estimates indicate that each gram of lead added to gasoline exceeds $1,100
in damages. Our setting allows us to rule out potential confounders, such as correlated
pollutants or socioeconomic status. We provide the first causal estimates linking adult
mortality to leaded gasoline, highlight the value of banning on-road leaded gasoline,
and present policy-relevant cost estimates at the lowest ambient levels to date.
JEL: I00, I18, Q53
Keywords: lead, air pollution, mortality, childhood health, gasoline

Lead (Pb) is a toxic heavy metal associated with numerous adverse outcomes ranging
from increased aggressive behavior to premature mortality. In response to mounting health
concerns, countries around the world began taking action in the 1970s to reduce lead exposure. In 1975, Japan phased lead out of regular gasoline and the United States mandated
all new model-year cars to have emission control devices that required unleaded instead of
leaded gasoline (Newell and Rogers, 2003; Yoshinaga, 2012). Many European and Asian
countries began lead phasedowns in the 1980s (Nriagu, 1990), while African and Middle
Eastern countries generally began the process in the 1990s or 2000s (Thomas, 1995; Lovei,
1998). As of 2020, leaded gasoline has been phased out of regular on-road use in all but one
∗

Hollingsworth: hollinal@indiana.edu. O’Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs. Indiana
University, 1315 E. Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN, 47405. Rudik: irudik@cornell.edu. Charles H. Dyson
School of Applied Economics and Management. Cornell University, Warren Hall, Ithaca, NY, 14853. We
thank Patrick Carlin, Livy Crim, Sam Kuster, and Shyam Raman for research assistance. We thank Lindsay
Allen, Judd Boomhower, Karen Clay, Brian Dillon, Maoyong Fan, Teevrat Garg, Scott Grosse, Dave Keiser,
Jonathan Ketcham, Cathy Kling, David Konisky, Gabe Lade, David Molitor, Julian Reif, Jessica Reyes,
Nick Sanders, Edson Severnini, Kosali Simon, Gregory Steele, Coady Wing, Nikos Zirogiannis, Eric Zou,
and seminar participants at the AERE Summer Conference, the Annual Health Economics Conference, the
ASHEcon Annual Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, EPA NCEE, the Heartland
Workshop, Indiana University, the Inter-American Development Bank, Miami University, the NBER EEE
Spring Meetings, UC Davis, UC San Diego, the University of Connecticut, and the University of Louisville for
valuable comments. A replication package for this project can be found at http://doi.org/10.3886/E120128V1
(Hollingsworth and Rudik, 2020).

Page 2 of 95

country (UN Environment Programme, 2020). The reduction of lead in gasoline produced
steep declines in ambient lead concentrations, representing one of the greatest public health
achievements in recent history.1
Despite these advances, the phaseout of lead from gasoline remains incomplete. While
virtually every country has banned the sale of leaded gasoline for on-road use, it is still
widely allowed for off-road uses such as aviation and automotive racing.2 The continued use
of lead remains a major public health concern as thousands of communities still grapple with
lead contamination from legacy sources (Pell and Schneyer, 2016), and research increasingly
suggests there is no safe level of exposure (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012;
Lanphear, 2017).
In this paper we use the automotive racing exemption from the United States Clean
Air Act to causally identify the external effects of leaded gasoline. We take advantage of a
novel quasi-experiment where two major racing organizations, the National Association for
Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) and the Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA),
switched from leaded to unleaded gasoline in 2007.3 Using difference-in-differences and event
study designs, we estimate the relationship between leaded gasoline use and each link in the
causal chain from release of lead in the air, to accumulation of lead in blood, and finally to
impacts on human mortality. We find that each leaded race significantly increases nearby
ambient lead concentrations in the weeks following the race. We further find that leaded races
increase the prevalence of elevated blood lead levels (EBLLs) in children and increase elderly
mortality. This provides the first causal evidence that leaded gasoline exposure increases
adult mortality.
We estimate that the reduction in annual lead emissions from deleading NASCAR and
ARCA races yielded social benefits of $1,800 per child in counties with racetracks, and $600
per child in bordering counties through avoided IQ reductions. The benefits from avoided
premature elderly mortality in racetrack and bordering counties are over $15 million per
race, totaling $2.2 billion per year. These annual benefits are more than the estimated value
1

Lead was used in a variety of products because of its efficacy and versatility. It was added to gasoline
for its lubrication properties and to boost octane, reducing the likelihood of pre-ignition; it was added to
paint to increase moisture resistance, brightness, and durability, as well as to accelerate drying; and it has
been used in pipes and pipe solder because of its malleability.
2
In the United States, federal regulations allow unleaded gasoline to contain up to 0.05 grams of lead per
gallon. This is about 2% of the lead content added to gasoline in the 1970s. See 40 CFR § 80.140 and 40
CFR § 80.173 (b).
3
The EPA had been concerned about racing lead emissions leading up to 2007. A 2006 report on lead
writes, “As was the case with on-road emissions during the time of universal leaded gasoline use, the combustion of racing fuel likely elevates ambient Pb concentrations in the nearby area. This may pose some
health risk for some subpopulations, such as residents living in the vicinity of racetracks, fuel attendants,
racing crew and staff, and spectators.” (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2006).

2

Page 3 of 95

of all NASCAR teams combined (Forbes, 2020).
The mortality effects alone put a lower bound on the social cost of a gram of lead in
gasoline at $1,100. These magnitudes, while large, are consistent with prior observational
findings on the relationship between adult mortality and lead exposure (Pirkle et al., 1985;
Lustberg and Silbergeld, 2002; Menke et al., 2006; Lanphear et al., 2018). For comparison,
the equivalent mortality reduction from deleading NASCAR and ARCA races could be generated by reducing PM2.5 concentrations in the areas surrounding racetracks by 11 µg/m3 ,
90% of 2006 levels (Deryugina et al., 2019).
The deleading of automotive races is an ideal setting to identify the effects of lead since
it overcomes identification challenges such as residential sorting and correlated declines in
emission of lead and other pollutants at the tailpipe. The switch to unleaded fuel was the
only fuel-relevant change made by NASCAR or ARCA in 2007, and races continued in the
same places and at roughly the same times of year. In our empirical approach, we compare
changes in population outcomes, before and after deleading, between those who live near
racetracks and those who live further away. This enables within-population comparisons
that alleviate problems with persistent confounders such as socioeconomic status, the stock
of soil lead, the presence of leaded household paint, and lead emissions from nearby municipal
airports.
Races emit large quantities of lead that significantly increase ambient concentrations,
providing sufficient statistical power for our analysis. Figure 1 compares the magnitude
of lead emissions from races to the distribution of annual airborne lead emissions at Toxic
Release Inventory (TRI) facilities, and to annual lead emissions at airports. A single threehour race emits more lead than the annual total of 70% of all lead-emitting facilities in the
TRI, and as much lead as the average airport in an entire year. If all races were aggregated
into a single TRI entity they would emit an estimated 2 million grams of lead per year,
collectively ranking as the 30th largest emitter out of over 5,000 facilities and accounting for
roughly half a percent of all annual U.S. lead emissions.4,5
This work makes several contributions to the literature. The main contribution is that we
use a quasi-experiment to causally link three economically relevant outcomes to well-defined
sources and quantities of leaded gasoline. In turn, we provide the first causal evidence of the
effects of leaded gasoline exposure on adult mortality, and construct a credible lower bound on
4

This is 800 times the median annual TRI facility emissions and 25 times the average.
Prior research has demonstrated that employees on race teams (e.g. pit crews, mechanics) had high
blood lead levels prior to the 2007 deleading. Blood lead levels for employees on NASCAR race teams in
1968 and 2006 were over 7 µg/dl higher than the population averages in those same years. Testing in 2006
showed that 40% of NASCAR team members had blood lead levels above 10 µg/dl, the threshold at the
time for elevated blood lead (Polacek and Collins, 1968; O’Neil et al., 2006).
5

3

Page 4 of 95

Figure 1: Automotive racing and aviation lead emissions compared to distribution of all
lead-emitting facilities in the 2005 TRI.

Note: Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) facility emissions are the sum of fugitive and stack emissions in 2005,
the year prior to unleaded race tests. The distribution is similar for 2006. We only include TRI facilities with
positive quantities of airborne lead emissions. TRI and airport emissions are annual totals while average race
emissions are about a three hour total. Airborne lead emissions from both automotive races and aircraft are
not reported in the TRI. We obtain the amount of lead emitted from NASCAR and ARCA races using an
estimate of 3.2 race miles per gallon as the average fuel economy. The methodology behind the fuel economy
estimate can be found in Section A.10, and total emissions are calculated in Section A.11.

the social cost of lead in gasoline. Second, the deleading of racing fuel allows us to separately
identify the effect of lead emissions from other correlated pollutants, socioeconomic factors,
and legacy lead in the soil and on the road. This is a critical distinction between prior
research designs and our approach. Third, we show that the effects of deleading are readily
apparent in the raw data, and we use the same study design to estimate the effects on each
link in the emission-outcome chain, assuring internal validity. Fourth, our work sheds light
on the adverse effects of lead at some of the lowest levels of ambient lead exposure studied
in the literature.6 This allows us to provide policy-relevant estimates that are pertinent to
6

One caveat to our findings is that the same quantity of emissions may differentially affect health if
released over a longer time period. Short-lived, but high-rate exposure (e.g., an automotive race) may affect

4

Page 5 of 95

modern exposure levels. A nascent literature, to which this paper contributes, increasingly
demonstrates that there is no safe level of lead exposure (Aizer et al., 2018; Grönqvist et al.,
2018; Lanphear et al., 2018).
This paper also helps to quantify both the value of the global deleading of on-road gasoline
and the large social costs of continued usage of leaded gasoline for racing and aviation. While
NASCAR and ARCA now use unleaded fuel, leaded racing fuel can still be legally purchased
at hundreds of locations across the U.S. and remains widely used in both professional and
amateur races. Our mortality cost estimate indicates that the efficient price for leaded racing
fuel is orders of magnitude higher than current prices, which range from $10-$20 per gallon.
The continued use of leaded racing fuel puts participants, attendees, and those who live
nearby at risk of bearing undue external costs. Although we do not directly study aviation
gasoline, our results are suggestive that the use of leaded fuel by piston-engine aircraft
remains a major threat to public health worldwide. Over a quarter of a million aircraft
across the world still use leaded avgas (Federal Aviation Administration, 2020), and over
500,000 gallons are used each day in the United States alone (Kessler, 2013).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I. describes the physiology of lead and relevant
prior research. Section II. reports data sources. Section III. contains methods and results.
Section IV. computes the value of external effects of leaded gasoline on blood lead levels, and
premature mortality. Section V. concludes. The appendix contains the history of NASCAR
and ARCA’s switch to unleaded fuel, information on the ambient lead sample, information on
other events at tracks, an additional cross-sectional soil analysis, information on collinearity
issues, summary statistics, robustness checks and an alternative split-sample instrumental
variables approach, associations related to environmental justice, a balance table, results
from a survey testing knowledge about NASCAR fuel use, an out-of-sample validation of
our ambient air estimates, a counterfactual prediction of ambient lead levels if leaded gas
was still used for on-road driving, and additional calculations used to put our effects into
context.

I.

The Physiology of Lead and Prior Work

Lead can enter the body through the skin, digestive tract, or by inhalation.7 Once in the
blood stream, lead can be deposited in both soft (e.g., liver and brain) and hard (e.g. teeth
and bone) tissues. Lead has a half life of approximately 30 days in the blood, up to a few
health differently than constant but low-rate exposure (e.g. industrial facility).
7
See Papanikolaou et al. (2005), Garza et al. (2006), and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2006)
for more details on how it enters and affects the body; Ranft et al. (2008) for a review of how ambient lead
concentrations correlate more strongly with blood lead levels than soil lead concentrations; and He et al.
(2009) and Oh et al. (2017) for more on how mean blood lead and ambient lead levels rapidly decreased
following the enactment of leaded gasoline regulations in Korea and China.

5

