Arrival of Young Talent: The Send-down Movement and
Rural Education in China
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1414.R3
Manuscript Type: Administrator
Keywords: I25, J24, N35

Page 1 of 71

Arrival of Young Talent: The Send-down Movement and
Rural Education in China
By YI CHEN, ZIYING FAN, XIAOMIN GU, AND LI-AN ZHOU*
This paper estimates the effects of the send-down movement during the Cultural Revolution—when about 16 million urban youth
were mandated to resettle in the countryside—on rural education.
Using a county-level dataset compiled from local gazetteers and
population censuses, we show that greater exposure to the sentdown youths significantly increased rural children’s educational
achievement. This positive effect diminished after the urban youth
left the countryside in the late 1970s but never disappeared. Rural
children who interacted with the sent-down youths were also more
likely to pursue more-skilled occupations, marry later, and have
smaller families than those who did not.
JEL: I25, J24, N35, O15, R23
Keywords: Send-down Movement, Cultural Revolution, Rural Education, Persistent Effect
In 1968, two years after the start of the Cultural Revolution, China’s central
government launched the “send-down movement,” which mandated about 16 million urban youth to temporarily resettle in rural areas. This massive campaign
lasted until the late 1970s. The villages receiving the “sent-down youths” (SDYs),
typically junior and senior high school graduates,1 were generally located in poor
areas where few people received more than a primary school education.2 Al* Chen: Institute for Economic and Social Research, Jinan University; School of Entrepreneurship and Management, ShanghaiTech University (email: chenyi1@shanghaitech.edu.cn). Fan: School
of Public Economics and Administration, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics (email:
fan.ziying@mail.shufe.edu.cn). Gu: International Business School, Shanghai University of International
Business and Economics (email: guxiaomin517@suibe.edu.cn). Zhou: Guanghua School of Management,
Peking University (email: zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn). We thank the editor Esther Duflo and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. We are also grateful for comments from
Jie Bai, Steven N. Durlauf, Hanming Fang, Richard B. Freeman, James J. Heckman, Shi Li, Yi Lu,
Xin Meng, Zheng (Michael) Song, Shang-Jin Wei, and Yifan Zhang. We thank participants at the 2018
CCER Summer Institute, 2018 Chicago–Jinan Joint Initiative Workshop, 2018 Chinese Economy Summer Institute, 2019 China Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 4th Biennial Conference of China
Development Studies, 2019 Singapore Economic Review Conference, and numerous seminars for their
feedback. Chen acknowledges financial support from the 111 Project of China (B18026) and from the
National Science Foundation of China (71903066). Fan acknowledges financial support from the National
Science Foundation of China (71573165, 71973088). Zhou acknowledges financial support from the Research Center for Comparative Economic History at Peking University. Finally, we thank Shuxian Chi,
Weidong Chi, Jing Li, and Yao Xie for their excellent RA work. All remaining errors are our own.
1 Based on our calculations from the 2010 wave of the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), 73.3% of
the SDYs had completed junior high education, and 28.3% had completed senior high education by the
time they were sent to the countryside.
2 According to China’s 1990 Population Census, 38.4% of rural people born between 1946 and 1955
(the control group in our later analysis) either received no schooling or failed to complete primary school;

1

Page 2 of 71

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

though the SDYs were expected to farm in the countryside, many of them were
assigned to teach rural kids because of their education advantages. In this paper,
we explore the movement’s unintended effect on rural education—i.e., how the
large-scale arrival of the SDYs benefited the approximately 245 million school-age
children in rural China at the time.3
The send-down movement provides a unique opportunity to study how this
unprecedented large-scale resettlement of talents contributed to the educational
attainment of millions of rural children. It has three unique features that facilitate our empirical analysis. First, the resettlement was mobilized in a top-down
and mandatory manner.4 Most urban youth could not choose whether (or where)
to go. Those who refused to take part in the program could be accused of opposing the great strategy of Chairman Mao, which would have resulted in severe
consequences (Pan, 2002). Second, migration was highly restricted in China at
that time because of the household registration (hukou) system. The 1958 codification of the household registration system decreed that all internal migration
was subject to approval by the local government. Finally, SDYs’ resettlement was
temporary. By the time rural children grew up, the vast majority of the SDYs
had left the countryside, excluding possible mechanical effects that the better
educated SDYs (and their offsprings) were counted as rural residents.5
We hand collected a county-level dataset on the number of SDYs each county
received from over 3,000 book-length local gazetteers. We combined this dataset
with individual-level population censuses to estimate how rural children’s exposure to those better-educated SDYs affected their educational attainment. Using
a cohort difference-in-difference (DID) strategy developed in Duflo (2001), we find
that the arrival of the SDYs significantly increased local rural children’s years of
schooling. We estimate that the effect of the SDYs resulted in an increase of 17.6
million person-years of schooling in rural areas. Our main results are robust to a
wide range of alternative specifications and robustness checks. The effect of the
SDYs is greater among less-educated groups and regions (girls and less-developed
counties), suggesting that the SDYs not only raised the overall level of rural education but also reduced socioeconomic inequality. As the movement came to an
end and the SDYs gradually left the countryside, their effect declined but never
vanished. We also find that the rural children who were exposed to SDYs were
more likely to attain education beyond junior high level, pursued higher-skilled
occupations including teachers, held more positive attitudes towards education,
married later, and had smaller families. Taken together, these results imply that
41.1% were primary school graduates; and only 4% attained education beyond junior high school.
3 This number is based on the number of rural children born between 1956 and 1969 (the treatment
group in our later analysis), according to our calculation from the 1982 China Population Census.
4 The mandatory nature of the movement does not necessarily imply that the flows of the SDYs were
exogenous. Nor does the top-down arrangement rule out the possibility that the upper-level government
assigned the SDYs based on strategic considerations. Nonetheless, our identification strategy is not based
on the random assignment of the SDYs. More details are provided below.
5 It is true that a small proportion (5%) of SDYs remained in the countryside after the movement.
We explain in Section IV.F why this small proportion cannot drive our main results.

Page 3 of 71

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

CHEN ET AL.: ARRIVAL OF YOUNG TALENT

3

the SDYs contributed to both the “quantity” and “quality” of rural education.
Our identification strategy does not require the number of SDYs received in
each county to be exogenous. The central requirement for identification in our
cohort DID strategy is the parallel-trend assumption: in the absence of the movement, the cohort trends in education should not be related to the intensity of
the treatment (here, the local density of SDYs). Our evidence supports this assumption. First, we use the 1982, 1990, and 2000 population censuses to show
that there were no heterogeneous pre-existing cohort trends with respect to the
density of SDYs after controlling for a set of regional and cohort characteristics.
Second, we examine the possible influences of certain local characteristics, such
as the grain production level and local government efforts to improve education,
and from other contemporaneous historical events, such as rural education expansion, the Cultural Revolution, and the Great Famine of 1959–1961. China’s
rural education (especially at the secondary level) rapidly expanded since the late
1960s—a period that largely overlapped with the send-down movement. To control for this confounding factor, we collected county-by-year information on the
number of local primary and secondary schools during the study period from local
gazetteers. We show that although the educational expansion did improve rural
children’s education, the estimated coefficients on the SDYs remain almost the
same. We also controlled for the local intensity of the Cultural Revolution (measured as the number of victims, which comes from Walder (2017)) and the Great
Famine (calculated as one minus the ratio of the cohort size of the famine cohort
over that of the non-famine cohort, following Meng, Qian and Yared (2015)).
Our study reveals the important consequences of a historical event on rural education and sheds new light on the contribution of human capital accumulation in
rural areas to China’s subsequent economic growth. Heckman and Yi (2014) and
Heckman and Feng (2018) found that a large stock of medium-skilled labor (with
primary or secondary education) acquired before China’s market-oriented reforms
has fueled its rapid economic growth in recent decades. Most of the affected rural
children in our analysis were in their twenties or thirties in the mid-1990s, when
the country’s economic reforms allowed them to migrate to cities to become manufacturing workers or to work in the vibrant Township and Village Enterprises in
rural areas. Combined with these observations, our empirical findings suggest a
potential link between the increase in rural human capital stock due to the arrival
of the SDYs and China’s rapid economic growth in the reform era.
Our study contributes to three strands of literature. The first examines the
channels of supplying human capital and their consequences in developing countries. Economists have uncovered a number of important supply-side factors,
such as school infrastructure (Duflo, 2001, Indonesia), conditional transfers such
as PROGRESA (Schultz, 2004, Mexico), child health (Miguel and Kremer, 2004,
Kenyan), and the availability of qualified teachers (Banerjee et al., 2007, India).
Our study is most related to Andrabi, Das and Khwaja (2013), who find that
girls’ secondary schools increase the local supply of low-cost teachers in Pakistan,

Page 4 of 71

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

which leads to more private schools. Our results also demonstrate that increasing the local supply of teachers is an important channel through which SDYs
improved local children’s education. Unlike Andrabi, Das and Khwaja (2013),
our paper examines the individual-level outcomes and investigates the persistent
effects on the affected children after the SDYs left the countryside, such as the
likelihood of going to senior high school, attitudes towards education, marriage
age, and occupational choices. In addition, our empirical results show that the
formation of human capital during this period might have laid down an important
foundation for China’s economic growth in the reform era.
The second literature investigates the social and economic consequences of
China’s send-down movement on the SDYs. The consequences include almost
every aspect of one’s life course (Zhou and Hou, 1999), such as marriage (Song
and Zheng, 2016), education and income (Xie, Jiang and Greenman, 2008), inter
vivos transfer (Li, Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2010), subjective wellbeing (Wang and
Zhou, 2017), political attitudes (Harmel and Yeh, 2016), beliefs and values (Gong,
Lu and Xie, 2015), and financial behavior (Fan, 2020). However, the program’s
impact on the rural areas that accommodated the SDYs remains understudied.
Kinnan, Wang and Wang (2018) and Xing and Zhou (2018) were among the first
to explore the program’s effects on destination provinces. They studied how the
lasting inter-provincial links created by SDYs’ temporary resettlement affected
current migration (Kinnan, Wang and Wang, 2018) and bilateral trade (Xing
and Zhou, 2018) decades after the program ended. Our study contributes to
the scholarship of the send-down program in two ways. First and foremost, we
uncover the effects of the SDYs on rural human capital accumulation and their
persistence. Second, our data go further down to the county level and include the
intra-province flow of SDYs, which accounted for 92.1% of total SDYs (Table 1).
In a study developed independently from ours,6 You (2018) examined a sample
of 61 counties in one province (Heilongjiang) and estimated how the densities of
SDYs during the movement affected local people’s education, employment, and
social values. We analyze a sample of nearly 2,000 counties (which include the
majority of counties affected by the movement) to provide a nationally representative estimate and a more thorough discussion of robustness, mechanisms, and
potentially confounding factors of the effects of the SDYs.
Third, our paper adds to the literature on the persistence of human capital
spillovers (Waldinger, 2010, 2012; Borjas and Doran, 2012; Moser, Voena and
Waldinger, 2014). Wantchekon, Klašnja and Novta (2014) examined human capital externalities within a village by exploiting the establishment of colonial schools
in Benin. Rocha, Ferraz and Soares (2017) studied human capital persistence by
exploiting a state-sponsored settlement policy in Brazil that attracted educated
immigrants. The resettlement program we investigate differs from those assessed
in previous studies of human capital spillovers in at least three ways. First, as
previously discussed, the resettlement was temporary and mandatory, and there
6 The working paper versions of both papers were available online in early 2018.

Page 5 of 71

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

CHEN ET AL.: ARRIVAL OF YOUNG TALENT

5

were few opportunities for internal migration for local people at that time. Second, the large scale of the resettlement and the number of local residents affected
were unprecedented. Third, the main motivation for the send-down movement
was not to improve rural education but to address severe urban unemployment.
Therefore, the improvement in rural education brought about by the SDYs was
an unintended consequence of the movement.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I briefly reviews
the relevant institutional background. In Section II, we introduce our dataset and
discuss the econometric set-ups. Section III reports the main results about how
exposure to SDYs affected the educational attainment of rural residents. Section
IV discusses alternative interpretations that may confound our main results. Section V presents the lasting impact of the SDYs after they left the countryside.
Section VI concludes.
I.
A.

Institutional Background

The Send-Down Movement: A Brief History

The origins of the send-down movement can be traced back to the 1950s. Chairman Mao Zedong declared in December 1955 that “[a]ll those intellectuals who
can go to the countryside should go there happily. The countryside is a vast
universe where there is plenty to be done.” In 1962, when the country struggled to overcome the Great Famine, the central government encouraged urban
youth to relocate to rural areas to alleviate food shortages in the cities. Before
the Cultural Revolution, the program operated on a relatively small scale, and
participation was largely voluntary. A large proportion of the SDYs at the time
went to either state farms or collective farms. Between 1962 and 1966, the rustication program sent about 1.29 million urban youths to the countryside (Bernstein,
1977)—accounting for 7.3% of the total 17.7 million SDYs during 1962–1979.
After the outbreak of the Cultural Revolution, the send-down movement made
a decisive turnaround and mandated about 16 million urban youths to go to
the countryside. Three motivations drove this extension of the program. First,
high school students could not continue their education due to severe disruptions
in the early years of the Cultural Revolution. In addition, the college entrance
exams were abolished in 1966, and high school graduates had no regular chance
of pursuing higher education. Second, urban unemployment soared in the chaos
created by the Cultural Revolution. Industrial output fell by 13.8% in 1967 and
4.2% in 1968. Thus high school graduates found it almost impossible to find jobs
in urban areas, which were previously assigned by the government. In other words,
urban students who graduated between 1966 and 1968 could not find jobs or
continue their education. The third motivation was to discharge the Red Guards
to end the chaos in urban areas. Mao mobilized the Red Guards, mostly junior or
senior high school students, during the first few years of the Cultural Revolution
as a political weapon to fight against the party establishment. However, the

