Myopia and Anchoring
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1436.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E31, E32, E52, E70, D80

Page 1 of 88

Disclosure Statement for “Myopia and Anchoring”
The submitted paper is based in part upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant Number SES-1757198. I declare that I have no other relevant financial or material interests that
relate to the research described in the submitted paper, entitled “Myopia and Anchoring.”
Sincerely,

George-Marios Angeletos
Professor of Economics, MIT

Page 2 of 88

Disclosure Statement for “Myopia and Anchoring”
I declare that I have no relevant financial or material interests that relate to the research described in the
submitted paper, entitled “Myopia and Anchoring.”
Sincerely,

Zhen Huo
Zhen Huo
Assistant Professor of Economics, Yale University

Page 3 of 88

Myopia and Anchoring
By George-Marios Angeletos and Zhen Huo∗

We develop an equivalence between the equilibrium effects of incomplete information and those of two behavioral distortions: myopia, or extra discounting of the future; and anchoring of current
behavior to past behavior, as in models with habit persistence or adjustment costs. We show how these distortions depend on higherorder beliefs and GE mechanisms, and how they can be disciplined
by evidence on expectations. We finally illustrate the use of our
toolbox with a quantitative application in the context of inflation,
a bridge to the HANK literature, and an extension to networks.
JEL: C72, D80, E30, E7
Keywords: Informational Frictions, Dynamic Beauty Contests,
Micro to Macro, DSGE

I.

Introduction

What are the macroeconomic effects of informational frictions? How do they
depend on general equilibrium (GE) mechanisms, market structures, and agent
heterogeneity? And how can they be quantified?
We develop a toolbox for addressing such questions and illustrate its use. On
the theoretical front, we offer an illuminating representation result and draw connections to the literatures on networks and HANK models. On the quantitative
front, we show how to extract the informational friction from survey evidence on
expectations and proceed to argue that it can rationalize sizable sluggishness in
the response of inflation and aggregate spending to shocks.
∗ Angeletos: Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 (email: angelet@mit.edu); Huo: Department of Economics, Yale University,
28 Hillhouse Ave, New Haven, CT 06511 (email: zhen.huo@yale.edu). We are grateful to three anonymous referees and the editor, Mikhail Golosov, for extensive feedback, and to Chris Sims, Alexander
Kohlhas, Luigi Iovino, and Alok Johri for discussing our paper in, respectively, the 2018 NBER Monetary Economics meeting, the 2018 Cambridge/INET conference, the 2018 Hydra workshop, and the
2018 Canadian Macro Study Group. We also acknowledge useful comments from Jaroslav Borovicka,
Simon Gilchrist, Jennifer La’O, John Leahy, Kristoffer Nimark, Stephen Morris, Mikkel Plagborg-Moller,
Dmitriy Sergeyev, and seminar participants at the aforementioned conferences, BC, BU, Columbia, NYU,
LSE, UCL, UBC, Chicago Fed, Minneapolis Fed, Stanford, Carleton, Edinburgh, CUHK, the 2018 Duke
Macro Jamboree, the 2018 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum EGF Group, the 2018 SED Meeting, the
2018 China International Conference in Economics, and the 2018 NBER Summer Institute. Angeletos
acknowledges the support of the National Science Foundation under Grant Number SES-1757198.

1

Page 4 of 88

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

Framework

Our starting point is a representative-agent model, in which an endogenous
outcome of interest, denoted by at , obeys the following law of motion:
(1)

at = ϕξt + δEt [at+1 ] ,

where ξt is the underlying stochastic impulse, or fundamental, ϕ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1]
are fixed scalars, and Et [·] is the rational expectation of the representative agent.
Condition (1) stylizes a variety of applications. In the textbook New Keynesian
model, this condition could be either the New Keynesian Philips Curve (NKPC),
with at standing for inflation and ξt for the real marginal cost, or the Euler
condition of the representative consumer (a.k.a. the Dynamic IS curve), with at
standing for aggregate spending and ξt for the real interest rate. Alternatively,
this condition can be read as an asset-pricing equation, with ξt standing for the
asset’s dividend and at for its price.
We depart from these benchmarks by letting people have a noisy “understanding” of the economy, in the sense of incomplete information. The friction could be
the product of either dispersed knowledge (Lucas, 1972) or rational inattention
(Sims, 2003). And it is the source of both first- and higher-order uncertainty. Relative to the frictionless, full-information, rational-expectations benchmark, there
is therefore not only gradual learning of the exogenous innovations, but also a
friction in how people reason about others (Morris and Shin, 1998; Tirole, 2015)
and thereby about GE effects (Angeletos and Lian, 2018).
An Observational Equivalence

Our main result is a representation of the equilibrium effects of the informational friction in terms of two behavioral distortions. Under appropriate assumptions, the equilibrium dynamics of the aggregate outcome at in the incompleteinformation economy are shown to coincide with that of a representative-agent
economy in which condition (1) is modified as follows:
(2)

at = ϕξt + δωf Et [at+1 ] + ωb at−1 ,

for some ωf < 1 and ωb > 0. The first distortion (ωf < 1) represents myopia towards the future, the second (ωb > 0) anchors current outcomes to past outcomes.
One dulls the forward-looking behavior, the other adds a backward-looking element akin to habit or adjustment costs.
Crucially, both distortions increase not only with the level of noise but also
with parameters that regulate the strategic interaction, or the GE feedback in
the economy. Economies in which the Keynesian cross is steeper, firms are more
strategic, or input-output linkages are stronger behave as if they are populated
by more impatient and more backward-looking agents.

Page 5 of 88

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

MYOPIA AND ANCHORING

3

Underlying insights and marginal contribution

The documented effects encapsulate the role of higher-order beliefs. To fix ideas,
consider the response of aggregate demand (= at ) to a drop in the real interest
rate (= ξt ). A consumer that becomes aware of this event now may nevertheless
doubt that others will be aware of the same event in the near future and may
therefore also doubt that aggregate spending will go up. As this logic applies for
the average consumer, the economy as a whole systematically underestimates the
future movements in aggregate income, and behaves like a representative agent
that excessively discounts the future. And the larger the dependence of spending
on income, or the steeper the Keynesian cross, the larger this discounting.
This explains the documented myopia. The anchoring, on the other hand, has
to do with learning. As more times passes since the occurrence of any given
shock, consumers become progressively more aware of it. But higher-order beliefs
adjust more sluggishly than first-order beliefs—equivalently, the expectations of
income adjust more sluggishly than expectations of interest rates. This reduces
the speed of adjustment in aggregate spending, or equivalently it increases the
apparent dependence of current spending on past spending. And the steeper the
Keynesian cross, the larger this effect, too.
Versions of these insights have been documented in the literature before, albeit not in the sharp form offered here.1 Relative to the state of the art, our
theoretical contribution contains: the bypassing of the curse of dimensionality
in higher-order beliefs; the existence, uniqueness and analytical characterization
of the equilibrium; the aforementioned observational-equivalence result; and an
extension to a class of incomplete-information networks. This in turn paves the
way to our applied contribution, which we detail below.
DSGE, micro to macro, and bounded rationality

Our observational equivalence offers the sharpest to-date illustration of how
informational frictions may substitute for the ad hoc forms of sluggish adjustment
employed in the DSGE literature: the backward-looking element in condition (2)
is akin to that introduced by habit persistence in consumption, adjustment costs
to investment, or indexation of prices to past inflation.
Crucially, the documented distortions increase not only with the level of noise
but also with parameters that regulate the strength of GE feedback loops and
the associated importance of higher-order beliefs. In the context of the NKPC,
examples of such parameters include the frequency of price adjustment, the degree
of market concentration, and the input-output matrix; and in the context of the
Dynamic IS curve, they include liquidity constraints and consumer heterogeneity.
1 In particular, the role of learning as source of sluggish adjustment in behavior is the common theme
of Sims (2003) and Mankiw and Reis (2002); the higher sluggishness of higher-order beliefs relative to
first-order beliefs has been emphasized by Woodford (2003) and Morris and Shin (2006); and the role of
higher-order beliefs as a source of as-if myopia has been highlighted by Angeletos and Lian (2018).

