Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2018-0338.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: O40, O30, Economic growth, productivity, R&D

Page 1 of 72

March 1, 2018
Editors, The American Economic Review
I would like to disclose I have received honorarium, speaking, teaching or consulting
fees from:
-

Toulouse Network for Information Technology, sponsored by Microsoft
Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank
Inter-American Development Bank
Asian Development Bank
World Bank
IMF
Kauffman Foundation

I have received grants from:
-

National Science Foundation
Kauffman Foundation
Sloan Foundation
International Growth Center
Russell Sage Foundation
Stanford University

I have the following editorial positions:
-

Quarterly Journal of Economics
Econometrica
Economic Journal
Journal of Economic Perspectives

I have no other relevant interests to disclose

Best regards

Nicholas Bloom

Page 2 of 72

March 5, 2018
The author declares that (s)he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper
Charles I. Jones
Stanford University

Page 3 of 72

March 5, 2018

Over the past three years, I have received financial support from the following organizations:
Google DeepMind. I have no positions as officer, director, or board member of any non-profit
organizations or profit-making entities.
Michael Webb
Stanford University

Page 4 of 72

American Economic Review Disclosure Statement 02/07/18
1. Financial support is as stated in the article.
2. From 2003-2017, John Van Reenen directed the Centre for Economic
Performance which was core funded by the Economic and Social Research
Council. Both these centres also receive additional government and
research council funding.
3. No paid or unpaid positions, other than that disclosed under (2).
4. No necessary disclosure for relatives or partners.

John Van Reenen,
Gordon Y. Billard Professor of Management and Economics, MIT
Department of Economics and Sloan Management School

Page 5 of 72

Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?
By N ICHOLAS B LOOM , C HARLES I. J ONES , J OHN VAN R EENEN , AND M ICHAEL
W EBB∗
Long-run growth in many models is the product of two terms: the effective number of researchers and their research productivity. We present
evidence from various industries, products, and firms showing that research effort is rising substantially while research productivity is declining sharply. A good example is Moore’s Law. The number of researchers
required today to achieve the famous doubling of computer chip density is more than 18 times larger than the number required in the early
1970s. More generally, everywhere we look we find that ideas — and
the exponential growth they imply — are getting harder to find.
JEL: O40, O30
Keywords: Economic growth, productivity, R&D
This paper applies the growth accounting of Robert M. Solow (1957) to the production function for new ideas. The basic insight can be explained with a simple equation,
highlighting a stylized view of economic growth that emerges from idea-based growth
models:
Economic
growth
e.g. 2% or 5%

=

Research
productivity
↓(falling)

×

Number of
researchers
↑(rising)

Economic growth arises from people creating ideas. As a matter of accounting, we can
decompose the long-run growth rate into the product of two terms: the effective number
of researchers and their research productivity. We present a wide range of empirical
evidence showing that in many contexts and at various levels of disaggregation, research
effort is rising substantially, while research productivity is declining sharply. Steady
growth, when it occurs, results from the offsetting of these two trends.
∗ Bloom: Stanford University, Department of Economics, Stanford, CA 94305 and NBER, nbloom@stanford.edu.
Jones: Stanford University, Graduate School of Business, 655 Knight Way, Stanford, CA 94305 and NBER,
chad.jones@stanford.edu. Van Reenen: MIT, Department of Economics, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02139 and NBER, vanreene@mit.edu. Webb: Stanford University, Department of Economics, Stanford, CA 94305,
mww@stanford.edu. We are grateful to Emi Nakamura and three anonymous referees for detailed comments. We also
thank Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Ufuk Akcigit, Michele Boldrin, Ben Jones, Pete Klenow, Sam Kortum, Peter
Kruse-Andersen, Rachel Ngai, Pietro Peretto, John Seater, Chris Tonetti, and seminar participants at Bocconi, the CEPR
Macroeconomics and Growth Conference, CREI, George Mason, Harvard, LSE, MIT, Minneapolis Fed, NBER growth
meeting, the NBER Macro across Time and Space conference, the Rimini Conference on Economics and Finance, and
Stanford for helpful comments. We are grateful to Antoine Dechezlepretre, Keith Fuglie, Dietmar Harhoff, Wallace Huffman, Brian Lucking, Unni Pillai, and Greg Traxler for extensive assistance with data. The Alfred Sloan Foundation, SRF,
ERC and ESRC have provided financial support. An online data appendix with replication files can be obtained from
http://web.stanford.edu/people/chadj.

1

