Five Facts About Beliefs and Portfolios
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0243.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords:

Page 1 of 79

December 8th 2020
I hereby declare that I have no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, to disclose in connection with
the publication of manuscript “Five Facts About Beliefs and Portfolios” in the American Economic Review.
Vanguard provided anonymized portfolio and survey data as well as survey research services for this
project. For the purpose of this project, I am an unpaid consultant at Vanguard in order to access the
anonymized data.
Best Regards,

Matteo Maggiori
Associate Professor of Finance
Stanford University

Page 2 of 79

December 8th, 2020
I hereby declare that I have no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, to disclose in connection with the publication
of manuscript “Five Facts About Beliefs and Portfolios” to the American Economic Review. Vanguard provided anonymized
portfolio and survey data as well as survey research services for this project. For the purpose of this project, I am an unpaid
consultant at Vanguard in order to access the anonymized data.
Best Regards,
Stefano Giglio
Professor of Finance
Yale University

Page 3 of 79

Page 4 of 79

December 9th 2020
I hereby declare that I have no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, to disclose in connection with the of manuscript
“Five Facts About Beliefs and Portfolios” at the American Economic Review. Vanguard provided anonymized portfolio and
survey data as well as survey research services for this project. I am employed by Vanguard in a research capacity.

Best Regards,
Stephen Utkus
Principal
Vanguard Center for Investor Research

Page 5 of 79

F IVE FACTS A BOUT B ELIEFS AND P ORTFOLIOS
Stefano Giglio*

Matteo Maggiori†

Johannes Stroebel‡

Stephen Utkus§

September 2020

Abstract
We study a newly-designed survey administered to a large panel of wealthy retail investors.
The survey elicits beliefs that are important for macroeconomics and finance, and matches
respondents with administrative data on their portfolio composition, their trading activity, and
their log-in behavior. We establish five facts in this data: (1) Beliefs are reflected in portfolio
allocations. The sensitivity of portfolios to beliefs is small on average, but varies significantly
with investor wealth, attention, trading frequency, and confidence. (2) Belief changes do not
predict when investors trade, but conditional on trading, they affect both the direction and the
magnitude of trades. (3) Beliefs are mostly characterized by large and persistent individual
heterogeneity. Demographic characteristics explain only a small part of why some individuals
are optimistic and some are pessimistic. (4) Expected cash flow growth and expected returns
are positively related, both within and across investors. (5) Expected returns and the subjective
probability of rare disasters are negatively related, both within and across investors. These five
facts provide useful guidance for the design of macro-finance models.

JEL Codes: G11, G12, R30.
Keywords: Surveys, Expectations, Sentiment, Behavioral Finance, Discount Rates, Rare Disasters.
* Yale School of Management, NBER, CEPR: stefano.giglio@yale.edu.
† Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, NBER, CEPR: maggiori@stanford.edu.
‡ Stern School of Business, New York University, NBER, CEPR: johannes.stroebel@stern.nyu.edu.
§ Vanguard: steve_utkus@vanguard.com.

Stephen Utkus is employed at Vanguard in a research capacity. Giglio, Maggiori, and Stroebel are unpaid consultants
at Vanguard in order to access the anonymized data. Vanguard provided anonymized portfolio and survey data as
well as survey research services for this project. We thank Klaus Adam, Isaiah Andrews, Nick Barberis, John Campbell,
Darrell Duffie, Ben Enke, John Geanakoplos, Nicola Gennaioli, Gary Gorton, Camelia Kuhnen, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Hanno Lustig, Yueran Ma, Emi Nakamura, Stefan Nagel, Frank Schilbach, Alexi Savov, Amit Seru, and Andrei Shleifer,
as well as numerous seminar and conference participants. The authors would also like to thank Catherine Clinton,
Sophia Bunyaraksh, and Jean Young at Vanguard for their help with the project.

