The macroeconomic effects of oil supply news: Evidence
from OPEC announcements
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0964.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: C32, E32, Q43

Page 1 of 92

Disclosure Statement for “The macroeconomic effects of oil supply news:
Evidence from OPEC announcements” by Diego R. Känzig
September 12, 2020
To whom it may concern,
I hereby declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described above.
Yours faithfully,
Diego Känzig

1

Page 2 of 92

The macroeconomic effects of oil supply news: Evidence
from OPEC announcements
By Diego R. Känzig∗
This paper studies how changes in oil supply expectations affect the
oil price and the macroeconomy. Using a novel identification design, exploiting institutional features of OPEC and high-frequency
data, I identify an oil supply news shock. These shocks have statistically and economically significant effects. Negative news leads
to an immediate increase in oil prices, a gradual fall in oil production and an increase in inventories. This has consequences for
the U.S. economy: activity falls, prices and inflation expectations
rise, and the dollar depreciates—providing evidence for a strong
channel operating through supply expectations.
JEL: C32, E31, E32, Q43
Recent turbulences in the oil market have sparked renewed interest in the longstanding question of how oil prices affect the macroeconomy. This question is
challenging because oil prices are endogenous and respond to global economic developments. To provide an answer, one has to account for the underlying drivers
of the oil price. From a policy perspective, oil supply shocks are of particular interest because of their stagflationary effects. However, as oil prices are inherently
forward-looking, not only current supply matters but also expectations about the
future.
In this paper, I propose a novel approach to identify a shock to oil supply expectations, exploiting institutional features of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and information contained in high-frequency data.
The idea is to use variation in oil futures prices around OPEC production announcements. OPEC accounts for about 44 percent of world oil production and
thus, its announcements can have a significant impact on oil prices (Lin and Tam∗ London Business School, Regent’s Park, London NW1 4SA, United Kingdom (email: dkaenzig@london.edu). I am indebted to Paolo Surico, Hélène Rey, and Lucrezia Reichlin for their invaluable
guidance and support. For helpful comments and suggestions, I thank the coeditor, Emi Nakamura,
three anonymous referees, the discussants, Thomas Drechsel and James Hamilton, Michele Andreolli,
Juan Antolin-Diaz, Jonas Arias, Christiane Baumeister, Hilde Bjørnland, João Cocco, Luı́s Fonseca,
Elena Gerko, Refet Gürkaynak, Christian Hepenstrick, Even Hvinden, Lutz Kilian, Kurt Lunsford, Bartosz Maćkowiak, Joseba Martinez, Tsvetelina Nenova, Elias Papaioannou, Anna Pavlova, Gert Peersman,
Ivan Petrella, Michele Piffer, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, Valerie Ramey, Giovanni Ricco, Kenneth Rogoff,
Barbara Rossi, Vania Stavrakeva, Benjamin Wong, Kaspar Wüthrich and seminar participants at the
ASSA Meetings in San Diego, the CFE Workshop in London, the EEA Conference in Manchester, the
IAAE Conference in Cyprus, the Ghent Workshop on Empirical Macro, the QMUL Workshop in SVARs,
the SNDE Conference in Dallas, the SEA Conference in Zürich, the Bank of England, the Swiss National
Bank, Now-casting, LBS TADC, and LBS Economics. Data for the project were kindly provided by
Andrea Bastianin, Christiane Baumeister and Lutz Kilian. Finally, I thank the SNDE for the Dwyer
Ramsey Prize for the best paper presented by a graduate student at its 27th Symposium and the IAAE
for the student travel grant.

1

Page 3 of 92

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

vakis, 2010; Loutia, Mellios and Andriosopoulos, 2016). While OPEC is known to
be heavily driven by political considerations, its decisions are likely not exogenous
but also depend on the state of the global economy (Barsky and Kilian, 2004).
However, by measuring the changes in oil futures prices in a tight window around
the announcements, we can isolate the impact of news about future oil supply.
Reverse causality of the global economic outlook can be plausibly ruled out because it is already priced in at the time of the announcement and is unlikely to
change within the tight window. Using the resulting series as an external instrument in an oil market VAR model, I am able to identify a structural oil supply
news shock.
Oil supply news shocks have statistically and economically significant effects.
Negative news about future oil supply leads to a large, immediate increase in
oil prices, a gradual but significant fall in world oil production and a significant
increase in world oil inventories. Global economic activity does not change significantly on impact but then starts to fall persistently. This has consequences
for the U.S. economy: industrial production falls and consumer prices rise significantly. This evidence supports the notion that changes in expectations about
future supply can have powerful effects even if current oil production does not
move.
I also show that oil supply news contribute meaningfully to historical variations
in the oil price. This finding illustrates that major episodes in oil markets, such
as political events in the Middle East, impact the oil price not only through their
effect on current supply but, crucially, also through changes in supply expectations.
Studying various propagation channels of oil supply news, I find that oil price
and inflation expectations rise significantly while uncertainty indicators are hardly
affected—consistent with the interpretation of a news shock. Interestingly, the rise
in inflation expectations is stronger for households, in line with recent evidence
by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015). Oil supply news also lead to a significant
increase in consumer prices even after excluding energy prices, a persistent fall
in consumption and investment expenditures, rising unemployment, and falling
stock market indices. The U.S. dollar depreciates significantly, especially against
the currencies of net oil exporting countries. Consistent with the exchange rate
response, the terms of trade deteriorates substantially and the trade balance falls
into deficit. Oil supply news shocks also turn out to be an important driver of the
economy as they explain a significant share of the variations in economic activity
and prices.
A comprehensive series of sensitivity checks indicate that the results are robust
along a number of dimensions including the identification design, the estimation
approach, as well as the model specification and sample period. In particular,
the results are robust to accounting for background noise over the event window.
An heteroskedasticity-based estimator produces consistent results, even though
the responses are less precisely estimated. I also show that the results are ro-

Page 4 of 92

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

OIL SUPPLY NEWS

3

bust to estimating the responses to the identified shock using local projections
and controlling for OPEC’s global demand forecasts in the construction of the
instrument.
This paper is related to a long literature studying the macroeconomic effects
of oil price shocks. A key insight in this literature is that oil price shocks do not
occur ceteris paribus. Therefore, it is important to account for the fundamental
drivers of oil price fluctuations (Kilian, 2009). These include oil supply, global
demand and expectations about future oil market conditions. In the last years, the
literature has made substantial progress in disentangling these drivers using SVAR
models of the oil market, identified with the help of zero restrictions (Kilian, 2009),
sign restrictions (Kilian and Murphy, 2012; Lippi and Nobili, 2012; Baumeister
and Peersman, 2013; Baumeister and Hamilton, 2019), and narrative information
(Antolı́n-Dı́az and Rubio-Ramı́rez, 2018; Caldara, Cavallo and Iacoviello, 2019;
Zhou, 2020).
A difficult problem in this context is the identification of the expectations-driven
component. A number of studies have addressed this problem by augmenting the
standard oil market model by global oil inventory data (Kilian and Murphy,
2014; Juvenal and Petrella, 2015). The idea is that expectational shifts in the oil
market should be reflected in the demand for oil inventories (see also Hamilton,
2009; Alquist and Kilian, 2010). An important challenge is that these shifts in
inventory demand capture many different things, including news about future
demand and supply or higher uncertainty, that existing identification strategies
cannot disentangle.
This paper contributes to this literature by proposing a new source of information and a novel identification strategy that can shed light on the role of oil
supply expectations. Using high-frequency variation in oil prices around OPEC
announcements, I identify a news shock about future oil supply. While I do not
model the oil futures market explicitly, I show that oil futures prices contain valuable information for identification. High-frequency oil supply surprises turn out
to be strong instruments for the price of oil. This is relevant as other proxies for
oil shocks, including Hamilton’s (2003) quantitative dummies or Kilian’s (2008)
production shortfall series, have been found to be weak instruments (Stock and
Watson, 2012).
From a methodological viewpoint, my approach is closely related to the highfrequency identification of monetary policy shocks. In this literature, monetary policy surprises are identified using high-frequency asset price movements
around monetary policy events, such as FOMC announcements (Kuttner, 2001;
Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson, 2005; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018a, among
others). The idea is to isolate the impact of monetary policy news by measuring
the change in asset prices in a tight window around policy announcements. To
account for confounding news over the event window, Rigobon and Sack (2004)
propose to exploit the heteroskedasticity in the data. Gertler and Karadi (2015)
use these high-frequency surprises as an external instrument in a monetary SVAR

Page 5 of 92

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

to estimate the macroeconomic effects of monetary policy shocks. The key idea
of this paper is to apply this approach to the oil market, exploiting institutional
features of OPEC.
This paper is not the first to look at OPEC announcements. In fact, there is a
large literature analyzing the effects of OPEC announcements on oil prices using
event study techniques (Draper, 1984; Loderer, 1985; Demirer and Kutan, 2010,
among others). To the best of my knowledge, however, this paper is the first to
look at the macroeconomic effects of these announcements—combining the event
study literature on OPEC meetings with the traditional oil market VAR analysis.1
My results indicate that news about future oil supply can have a meaningful
impact on the oil price and macroeconomic aggregates even if current production
does not move. In this sense, I also contribute to the literature on the role of news
in the business cycle by providing evidence for a strong expectational channel in
the oil market. Traditionally, this literature focuses on anticipated technology
(Beaudry and Portier, 2006; Barsky and Sims, 2011) and fiscal shocks (Ramey,
2011; Leeper, Walker and Yang, 2013). Only recently, there has been a growing
interest in other kinds of news, such as news about future monetary policy or
production possibilities (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018a; Arezki, Ramey and
Sheng, 2017). Gambetti and Moretti (2017) also identify a news shock in the oil
market but focus on the role of news versus noise shocks.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, I discuss the identification
design, providing background information on OPEC, details on the construction
of the instrument and some diagnostic tests. In Section II, I cover the econometric
approach. Section III presents the results. I start by analyzing the instrument
strength before discussing the effects of oil supply news on the oil market and
the macroeconomy, the contribution to historical episodes in the oil market, the
wider effects and propagation channels as well as the quantitative importance. In
Section IV, I perform a number of robustness checks. Section V concludes.
I.

Identification

The identification strategy in this paper is motivated by the following observations. The oil market is dominated by a big player, OPEC, that makes regular
announcements about its production plans. OPEC is closely watched by markets
and its announcements can lead to significant market reactions. This motivates
the use of high-frequency identification techniques. The idea is to construct a
series of high-frequency surprises around OPEC announcements that can be used
to identify a structural oil supply news shock. Before discussing the construction
of the surprise series, I provide some background information on OPEC and the
global oil and oil futures markets.
1 There are a few papers that also exploited the financial market reaction to oil events for identification
but in somewhat different contexts (Cavallo and Wu, 2012; Anzuini, Pagano and Pisani, 2015; Branger,
Flacke and Gräber, 2020).

