Common Ownership in America: 1980--2017
Journal: American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
Manuscript ID AEJMicro-2019-0389.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: L0, L13, L21

Page 1 of 56

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Theory and Measurement of Common Ownership”
Author Christopher Conlon
We have not received any funding for this paper.
We have received funding for a related project reviewing the literature around
common ownership from the Brookings Institution.
We also have an ongoing consulting relationship with the Federal Trade
Commission with regards to issues surrounding common ownership.
That relationship is primarily organized around two things: (a) we are providing
ongoing access and occasional support to our (publicly available) cleaned database
of 13f filings and (b) we have produced some additional tables and figures by
request related to the submitted paper. The likely output is some contribution to
policy whitepapers by the FTC and potential rulemaking down the road. We do not
have any interest in any ongoing litigation around this issue.

Page 2 of 56

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Common Ownership in America: 1980-2017”
Author Matt Backus
We have received funding for a related project reviewing the literature around
common ownership from the Brookings Institution. The remainder of my finding
comes solely from my institution (Columbia).
We also have an ongoing consulting relationship with the Federal Trade
Commission with regards to issues surrounding common ownership.
That relationship is primarily organized around two things: (a) we are providing
ongoing access and occasional support to our (publicly available) cleaned database
of 13f filings and (b) we have produced some additional tables and figures by
request related to the submitted paper. The likely output is some contribution to
policy whitepapers by the FTC and potential rulemaking down the road. We do not
have any interest in any ongoing litigation around this issue.

Page 3 of 56

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Common Ownership in America: 1980-2017”
Author Michael Sinkinson
We have received funding for a related project reviewing the literature around
common ownership from the Brookings Institution. The remainder of my finding
comes solely from my institution (Yale).
We also have an ongoing consulting relationship with the Federal Trade
Commission with regards to issues surrounding common ownership.
That relationship is primarily organized around two things: (a) we are providing
ongoing access and occasional support to our (publicly available) cleaned database
of 13f filings and (b) we have produced some additional tables and figures by
request related to the submitted paper. The likely output is some contribution to
policy whitepapers by the FTC and potential rulemaking down the road. We do not
have any interest in any ongoing litigation around this issue.

Page 4 of 56

Common Ownership in America: 1980–2017
By Matthew Backus, Christopher Conlon, and Michael Sinkinson∗
We empirically assess the implications of the common ownership
hypothesis from a historical perspective using the set of S&P 500
firms from 1980–2017. We show that the dramatic rise in common ownership in the time series is driven primarily by the rise of
indexing and diversification and, in the cross–section, by investor
concentration, which the theory presumes to drive a wedge between
cash flow rights and control. We also show that the theory predicts incentives for expropriation of undiversified shareholders via
tunneling, even in the Berle and Means (1932) world of the widely
held firm.
JEL: L0, L21, L13, G34
The near–universal assumption in economics is that firms take actions that maximize their own profits. Motivating the assumption, Friedman (1953) contends
that investors will discipline firms that do not at least mimic profit–maximizing
behavior. Investors’ interests, however, may be complicated by holdings in competing firms, which happens naturally when they seek the benefits of diversification. If firm decision–making is an expression of investor interests, and powerful
investors have stakes in competing firms, then one might not expect the firm to
maximize solely their own profits, yielding oligopoly outcomes, but instead to also
value the profit of their competitors when making strategic decisions. The idea
that large, diversified owners imply nonzero “profit weights” among ostensibly
competing firms is known as the common ownership hypothesis.
The theoretical framework of the common ownership hypothesis was first articulated in Rotemberg (1984), but it has recently become the subject of a lively
public policy debate thanks to empirical work suggesting that the growth of large,
diversified common owners may have caused prices to increase among banks and
airlines (Azar, Raina and Schmalz, 2016; Azar, Schmalz and Tecu, 2018).1 Contemporaneously, De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020b) argue that markups,
economy–wide, have sharply increased since 1980. Combining these lines of work
(see Shambaugh et al. (2018)) could go so far as to implicate common ownership
∗ Backus: Columbia University, NBER, and CEPR, matthew.backus@columbia.edu. Conlon: New
York University, cconlon@stern.nyu.edu. Sinkinson: Yale SOM and NBER, michael.sinkinson@yale.edu.
Thanks to seminar and conference participants at Bergen, Boston University, Brandeis University, CEPR
IO, Cornell, Duke University, EARIE, Federal Trade Commission, Harvard–MIT, IIOC, MACCI - Mergers and Antitrust, Microsoft, NBER, Penn State, Purdue, Red Rock Finance Conference, Rice, Rochester,
SITE, The London School of Economics, University of Chicago Booth, University of Pennsylvania, University of California at Santa Cruz, University of Texas at Austin, University of Georgia, University of
Virginia, Utah WBEC, Wisconsin and Yale, and conversations with Steve Berry, Wouter Dessein, Wei
Jiang, Charles Jones, Amit Khandelwal, Bruce Kogut, Nathan Miller, Fiona Scott Morton, Nancy Rose,
Martin Schmalz, and Glen Weyl. All remaining errors are our own.
1 The latter paper had over 325 citations as of the date of this draft according to Google Scholar.

1

Page 5 of 56

2

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

in macro–level phenomena such as declining labor share and investment, the productivity slowdown, and diminished “dynamism” of the economy (Gutiérrez and
Philippon, 2016).
However appealing this line of thought might be on the theory alone, there are
myriad empirical gaps in the argument left to fill. Efforts to test it have been
narrowly focused on reduced–form correlations.2 There, the null hypothesis is
zero effect of common holdings on some outcome of interest, and the alternative
— presumed to be due to common ownership — is any effect. This paper builds
on that effort by precisely laying out the empirical implications of the common
ownership hypothesis, taking seriously its theoretical foundations rather than
loading it into an “alternative,” nonzero effect of common holdings in a reduced–
form specification.
The payoff to this effort is threefold. First, it casts a light on the sources
of variation in prior empirical exercises. Much of that work depends on aggregate measures of common ownership based on the so–called Modified Herfindahl–
Hirschman Index, which is a function of the common ownership profit weights we
study and market shares. We show that between a third and a half of the variation in the profit weight measure comes not from overlapping ownership as many
researchers assume, but instead from relative investor concentration, which we
make precise in what follows. The role of relative investor concentration depends
on a model of corporate governance that defines the relationship between control
rights and cash flow rights, which has been previously unacknowledged in the
common ownership literature. Second, taking the theory of common ownership
seriously allows us to develop new testable implications. For one, modeling profit
weights highlights the asymmetries, both within markets and even within pairs of
firms. Already building on this observation, Boller and Scott Morton (2019) show
cumulative abnormal returns following the entry of a product–market competitor
into the S&P 500 that are consistent with the asymmetric implications of the
common ownership hypothesis. Among additional implications, the presence of
privately held firms would imply greater competition, and seemingly–innocuous
financial events such as being de–listed from a market index may have product
market effects. Taking the theory to its logical conclusion, we show that it is
possible for common ownership to create incentives for the “tunneling” of profits
from one firm to another. This had been previously thought to be impossible in
the Berle and Means (1932) world of the “widely–held firm” due to the absence of
a controlling interest. Third, our empirical exercise offers some perspective on the
plausibility of these implications. Taking the strict form of common ownership
seriously, it could be used to micro–found a tremendous increase in markups between 1980 and 2017, and one might also conclude that over 10% of S&P 500 firms
are engaging in tunneling behavior by 2017. We find these predictions to be unrealistically strong — rather, they suggest substantial gaps in our understanding of
corporate governance and, in particular, the model of governance that underlies
2 Exceptions include Kennedy et al. (2017) and Backus, Conlon and Sinkinson (2020a).

