Re-Examining the Contribution of Public Health Efforts to
the Decline in Urban Mortality
Journal: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Manuscript ID AEJApp-2019-0711.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: Public Health, Mortality Decline, Sanitation

Page 1 of 19

Comment on “Re-Examining the Contribution of Public Health Efforts
to the Decline in Urban Mortality”

David M. Cutler, and Grant Miller*

December 2020

Abstract:
We address points raised by Anderson et al. (2020), which commented on our prior
work. After correcting unambiguous data mistakes, our revised estimates suggest
that municipal water disinfection (filtration) explains 38% of the total mortality rate
decline in our sample cities and years – a result not very different from our 43%
original estimate. However, effects on infant mortality rates are smaller than in our
original analysis. Much of the difference between ACR’s analyses and ours is due
to the coding of partial intervention years and to differences in population
denominators, for which ideal data are difficult to find.

*Cutler: Department of Economics, Harvard University, 226 Littauer Center, 1805 Cambridge Street, Cambridge,
MA 02138 (email: dcutler@harvard.edu); Miller: School of Medicine, Stanford University, 615 Crothers Way,
Stanford, CA 94305 (email: ngmiller@stanford.edu). We thank Kim Singer Babiarz for assistance in preparing this
comment as well as Mark Anderson, Kerwin Charles, and Daniel Rees along with Seema Jayachandran and
anonymous referees for valuable comments and suggestions. A more detailed version of this comment is available
at: https://ngmiller.people.stanford.edu/role-public-health-improvements-health-advances-20th-century-unitedstates.

Page 2 of 19

1. Introduction
In this comment, we address points raised by Mark Anderson, Kerwin Charles, and
Daniel Rees’s paper entitled “Re-Examining the Contribution of Public Health Efforts to the
Decline in Urban Mortality” (“ACR”). ACR is, in part, an examination of our 2005
Demography article entitled “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The
20th Century United States” (“CM”) (Cutler and Miller, 2005a). During the summer of 2018, we
shared data and code from CM with ACR. They replicated our original results. In conducting
new analyses of both milk purification and water/sanitation technologies in American cities in
the early 20th century, ACR also identified differences between our original analysis and their
new analysis. ACR communicated with us about these issues in a helpful and collegial manner.
We very much appreciate their constructive feedback. In light of their results, we have evaluated
the issues further. We report our findings here.
The issues raised by ACR generally fall into three categories: (1) transcription errors, (2)
assignment of differing clean water intervention dates (including coding of partial intervention
years), and (3) the population denominators used in constructing mortality rates. Several of the
transcription errors identified in ACR are in fact mistakes in the original paper, which we are
grateful to have these identified.1 Otherwise, a large share of the discrepancy in the estimates
between CM and ACR is due to the coding of partial intervention years and to the construction
of population denominators for mortality rates when such denominators are not known for
certain. This comment focuses on the role of differing clean water intervention dates (using

1

The dataset is available online and includes updates to correct these errors (Cutler and Miller, 2005b). In this
comment, we use the corrected CM total mortality rates and infant mortality rates estimates as the basis for
comparison rather than those originally reported in CM (2005).

1

Page 3 of 19

corrected CM total mortality and infant mortality rates), and a longer comment available on-line
discusses all three issues in greater detail.

2. Assignment of Clean Water Intervention Dates
ACR identify a number of differences in clean water intervention dates between their
analysis and those used by CM. Reviewing the data more closely, differences in dates generally
appear to be the result of two factors: differences in dates reported in various historical sources
and differences in coding when an intervention was introduced in a phased manner over multiple
years. All told, out of 13 total cities, ACR use water filtration dates for 4 cities and water
chlorination dates for 7 cities that are different than the CM dates.2
On differences in intervention dates used by ACR and CM, different historical sources
give different dates for clean water interventions. When writing the original CM paper, we
addressed this inconsistency by making phone calls to individual waterworks to verify
intervention dates through each waterworks’ own records. Reaching some confidence on
intervention dates through discussions with waterworks employees, in part, ultimately motivated
our choice of dates (and cities) to incorporate. ACR use historical articles providing intervention
dates. Table 1, Columns 1 and 2 show the effect of using the alternative dates put forward by
ACR on our results. The filtration coefficient falls from -0.13 (p-value = 0.027) in the CM
analysis to -0.09 (p-value = 0.036) using ACR intervention dates.3

2

When allowing for fractional coding for years in which interventions were partially available, CM and ACR clean
water technology variables differ in value for all 13 cities.
3
Results obtained using ACR intervention dates throughout this comment differ slightly from those reported in
Tables 14 and 15 of an earlier working paper version (see ACR (2020)) because we recode lagged intervention
variables to correspond to the ACR intervention dates.

2

Page 4 of 19

Philadelphia provides an illustrative example of the differences due to coding.
Philadelphia adopted filtration technology incrementally between 1902 and 1909: filtration
systems were installed in Lower Roxborough in 1902, Kittanning in 1905, and Lancaster in
1906. However, the largest facility, Torresdale, which provided the majority of Philadelphia’s
drinking water (and was the largest facility in the world at the time), was not completed until
1909. ACR use 1906 as the date of filtration, while CM use 1908. Upon reconsideration of
Philadelphia’s history, we would actually be inclined to think that 1909 is the most appropriate
date to use in this case. We do not see a case for 1906 being the best choice of year.4
Finally, CM code water disinfection and sanitation interventions using indicator variables
(taking a value of 1 if an intervention was active at any point during a given year), while ACR
use in some instances a partial/fractional intervention coding for a subset of intervention years
(in monthly increments, or twelfths).5 Though seemingly minor, this coding difference matters
for the results. Table 1, Column 3 shows that simply recoding partial years of an intervention to
full years (but otherwise using ACR dates) increases the ACR filtration estimate from -0.09 (pvalue = 0.036) to -0.15 (p-value = 0.010), a value greater in magnitude than our original
estimate. In principle, the idea of using partial intervention year coding is a good one. However,
the ideal coding should be based on the share of clean water provided to people weighted by how

4

When adjusting Philadelphia's water filtration date to 1909, point estimates for total mortality increase to -0.14 (pvalue = 0.027) using CM (2005) dates for all other cities, -0.11 (p-value = 0.032) using ACR (2020) dates for all
other cities, and -0.16 (p-value = 0.006) when using ACR (2020) dates recoded as indicators. When adjusting
Philadelphia's date to 1909, point estimates for infant mortality are to -0.13 (p-value = 0.05) using CM (2005) dates
for all other cities, -0.05 (p-value = 0.475) using ACR (2020) dates for all other cities, and -0.14 (p-value = 0.012)
when using ACR (2020) dates recoded as indicators.
5
The first year of water filtration interventions is coded as partial/fractional years for eight cities. The first year of
water chlorination is coded as partial/fractional years for four cities. Finally, three cities have partial/fractional
coding for more than one intervention year (two cities with two years each of fractional coding and one city with
three years; in two cases, these values decrease over time before taking a value of 1).

3

Page 5 of 19

likely they were to die or water-born disease. Without this information, we hesitate to use partial
year data.
Ultimately, because some degree of judgment is required, we take an empirical approach
to assessing the sensitivity of the CM and ACR results to intervention dates. Specifically, we reestimate our original specification using all 8,192 possible combinations of CM and ACR
intervention dates.6 We also repeat this exercise changing ACR’s coding of fractional
intervention years to indicator variables for all cities. Focusing first on total mortality rates,
Figure 1, Panel A shows that no combination of dates using either partial intervention year
coding or exclusive indicator variable coding produces an estimate outside the confidence
interval using our original dates.
To further explore sensitivity, we also adopt a ‘leave-one-out’ strategy, starting with CM
dates, ACR dates, and ACR dates recoded as indicators, and we omit one city at a time from the
analysis. Figure 2, Panel A shows that the results are generally robust to excluding each city and
that no estimates are outside of the confidence intervals of the original CM or ACR estimates
(respectively).
Unlike for total mortality rates, estimates for infant mortality rates appear more sensitive
to the choice of dates, and in particular, sensitive to the coding of partial intervention years.
Table 1, Columns 4-6 show this, using dates and coding choices from both CM and ACR,
yielding -0.13 (p-value = 0.03) using CM dates, -0.05 (p-value = 0.45) using ACR dates, and 0.15 (p-value = 0.003) using ACR dates but with partial intervention years recoded as indicators.

6

When allowing for partial intervention years, CM and ACR intervention variables differ in at least some years for
all 13 cities, implying a total of 213 = 8,192 possible unique combinations of city-level intervention variables. When
recoding ACR dates to indictors (not allowing for partial years), intervention variables used CM and ACR differ for
only 9 cities, leading to a total of 29 = 512 possible unique combinations of city-level dates.

4

