Long-term Effects of the Targeting the Ultra Poor Program
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0667.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
24-Jan-2021
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Banerjee, Abhijit; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Economics;
Duflo, Esther; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of
Economics;
Sharma, Garima; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Economics;
Keywords: Ultra-Poor Programs; Long-run follow up, O15, poverty traps

Page 1 of 35

Long-term Effects of the Targeting the Ultra Poor Program
CGAP and the Ford Foundation provided funding for the study. No interested party
provided funding. No one had review rights prior to publication. Abhijit Banerjee serves
as the director of JPAL, which has been involved in providing technical and monitoring
assistance to scale up the TUP program. The research team obtained appropriate
university IRB certificates for all fieldwork.

Page 2 of 35

Long-term Effects of the Targeting the Ultra Poor
Program
By Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo & Garima Sharma∗
This paper studies the long-run effects of a “big-push” program
providing a large asset transfer to the poorest Indian households.
In a randomized controlled trial that follows these households over
10 years, we find positive effects on consumption (0.6 SD), food
security (0.1 SD), income (0.3 SD), and health (0.2 SD). These
effects grow for the first seven years following the transfer and persist until year 10. One main channel for persistence is that treated
households take better advantage of opportunities to diversify into
more lucrative wage employment, especially through migration.
Development economics has long posited that the poor may be poor for no good
reason other than the fact that they started poor (for some early work see, Leibenstein (1958), Dasgupta and Ray (1986), Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and
Zeira (1993)). This is the idea of a poverty trap which has the implication that
a one-time capital grant that makes very poor households significantly less poor
(“big push”) might set off a virtuous cycle that takes them out of poverty. Forty
three countries now embrace some version of this idea and make large transfers
to over 3.1 million of their poorest households1 . In particular, the “Targeting the
Ultra Poor” (TUP) intervention, pioneered by BRAC in Bangladesh, employs a
multi-faceted approach, offering poor households an asset transfer, consumption
support, savings, and training in the hopes of unlocking a poverty trap.
Short and medium-run evaluations across a number of contexts find large and
positive treatment effects of the TUP program on poor households’ economic
wellbeing, including on measures of net worth, income, consumption, and health
(Banerjee et al. (2015), Bandiera et al. (2017), Bedoya et al. (2019)). The policy push for these programs was in large part based on these evaluations, which
showed that if the results were persistent over time, in the long run, the program benefits would be larger than the (considerable) initial costs. Balboni et al.
∗ Banerjee: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, JPAL, and NBER (email: banerjee@mit.edu);
Duflo: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, JPAL, and NBER (email: eduflo@mit.edu); Sharma:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (email: gsharma@mit.edu). The authors thank Bandhan, in
particular Mr. Chandrashekhar Ghosh and Ramaprasad Mohanto, for their tireless support and collaboration, CGAP and the Ford Foundation for funding, Biotech International for donating bednets
and, especially, Annie Duflo, Lakshmi Krishnan, Justin Oliver and the Center for Microfinance for their
outstanding support of this project. Abhay Agarwal, Arkadeep Bandopadhyay, Prasid Chakraborty,
Gabriella Fleischman, Clemence Idoux, Sudha Kant, Jyoti Prasad Mukhopadhyay provided valuable research assistance. Field work approved by MIT Institutional Review Board under protocol #701002099
and #1408006525. The analysis was pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry, with unique identification
number: AEARCTR-0000382.
1 Partnership for Economic Inclusion “State of the Sector” report, 2018.

1

Page 3 of 35

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

(2020) provides evidence that the pattern of short and medium run impacts in
Bangladesh is indeed consistent with the presence of a poverty trap: if the program pushes household wealth above some threshold, they escape poverty, but if
they were too poor to start with, they slide back into poverty.
However, evidence of long-term impacts of such programs remains scarce. This
paper fills this gap by tracking the 4, 7 and 10 year impacts of a TUP program
in West Bengal, India. Observing both treatment and control households over
time is key to establishing the existence (or the lack thereof) of a poverty trap,
because it tells us whether households would have escaped poverty on their own
over many years absent any intervention through their own efforts, potentially
aided by larger, macroeconomic, tides that “raise all boats”.
The results show large improvements in household wellbeing even for those who
were not assigned to the program. Average household per capita consumption
was $1.35 (2018 PPP) at baseline in the control group, and $2.9 by year 10. Nevertheless, measures of economic wellbeing (consumption, wealth, health, income)
improve significantly and substantially faster among treated households until year
7 from the asset transfer, and the resulting treatment control gap persists between
year 7 and 10. Their per capita consumption is $0.6 per day (0.6 standard deviations) higher than the control group at both year 7 & 10, and income is 0.3
standard deviations higher. This temporal pattern of growing effects followed
by persistence is consistent with the alleviation of a poverty trap, what BRAC
describes as the graduation of treated households. However, it is also consistent
with there being persistent effects without actually getting out of a trap: the
control households do become less poor over time, and the treatment households
are still not very rich by the time the treatment effect stabilizes (although their
average consumption is above the World Bank threshold for “moderate poverty”).
It would take an even longer follow up to conclude that the treatment households
have reached a permanently higher steady state.
What are the actual channels through which the effect of a one-time shock
persists? This is the subject of much theoretical work (see for example, Dasgupta
and Ray (1986), Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Banerjee
(2000) among others). These papers emphasize the idea that poor households
are unable to reach the threshold level of investment at which productivity rises
steeply, either because they cannot raise or save enough capital or because they
are unwilling to absorb the accompanying increase in risk. The capital grant
pushes them over that threshold, and as a result their income goes up sharply
allowing them to sustain the new higher level of investment. A more recent
literature emphasizes psychological factors; becoming wealthier makes households
more optimistic about the future and therefore more willing to save and/or put
in effort (Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010), Genicot and Ray (2017)) or more
able to focus and take good decisions (Mullainathan and Shafir (2013)).
These models conceptualize the effect of the “big push” as a one-time shift to
a different mode of production. Our data, on the other hand, suggests a more

Page 4 of 35

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUELONG-TERM EFFECTS OF THE TARGETING THE ULTRA POOR PROGRAM3

complex dynamic response: initially (i.e at 18 months) these TUP beneficiaries are
mainly richer because they have the asset that was transferred (mainly livestock).
At 3 years they have diversified into new businesses in addition to the livestock
and have significantly more earnings from non-farm micro-enterprises than the
control group. This divergence gets even more amplified by year 7, when the
non-farm micro-enterprise earnings in treatment is nearly twice that in control.
However we also see the emergence of a third major source of divergence: wage
income. There is no treatment effect on wage earnings at 18 months or 3 years, but
by year 7 the gap between treatment and control is the same order of magnitude
as the effect on non-farm micro-enterprises and twice the impact on livestock
earnings. This seems to be almost entirely driven by a difference in the earnings
of migrants from the family between treatment and control households.
By year ten, we see another shift. The treatment effect on non-farm microenterprises attenuates relative to year 7 (though it is still higher than in year 3),
but the effect on remittances more than doubles. In other words, the household
is increasingly specialized in labor earnings, coming mainly from migrants.
These multiple shifts are not per se inconsistent with the theory since the idea of
the production technology in these models is sufficiently abstract to accomodate
doing different things at different points of time. However it does provide a quite
different perspective on what is going on. The first transition, from livestock to
non-farm micro-enterprises may not be particularly surprising, since the households were not given much choice on what assets they can get from the program
and they can use the earnings from the livestock to fund a move towards what
they see as a better opportunity. The shift towards more labor earnings demands
more of an explanation since in many models (e.g. Banerjee and Newman (1993))
the labor market is seen as the alternative that can be accessed even by those who
have no capital. However migration often requires an upfront investment (Bryan,
Chowdhury and Mobarak (2014)) and it is possible that treated households are
better placed to pay for that.
This last observation has another important implication: while it is of course
true that a macro shock that creates new opportunities for everyone can eliminate
a poverty trap and therefore make a TUP-like intervention unecessary, it is also
possible that the intervention made it easier to take advantage of new opportunities. This kind of macro shift seems to have transpired in our setting; in the
control group wage earnings go up by a factor of 3 between the first endline (at 18
months) and the last (at 10 years), probably because of a combination of growth
in India and a demographic shift, coming from the fact that the children of the
women who were selected for the study are now old enough to enter the labor
market. However the treatment group is better able to take advantage of these
new opportunities–for one, compared to the control group, members of treated
families are less likely to migrate to the nearest big city, Kolkata, as against to urban centers further away2 , and they migrate for longer. By year 7, wage earnings
2 Delhi is the most common urban destination for out-of-state migrants from Bengal ( (2018)).

Page 5 of 35

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

are almost 30% larger in the treatment group.
This could be because they have more access to capital and migrating (especially migrating far) is expensive. Or it could be that they are better informed
or more confident as a result of the headstart they receive (Banerjee et al. (2020)
makes the case that the TUP intervention in Ghana raises labor supply through
such psychological mechanisms). Whatever the explanation, the important insight is that an intervention like TUP might empower beneficiaries to take better
advantage of whatever new opportunities arise over time and for that reason,
positive macroeconomic shifts may be complementary to a big push intervention
rather than a substitute.
This paper is most closely related to a small number of recent papers studying
whether a one-time positive shock has long term impact on the lives of the poor.
The closest two are perhaps Blattman, Fiala and Martinez (2020) who find that a
big push intervention in Uganda has a large impact 4 years after the intervention,
which disappears by year 9 as the control group catches up with the treated
group due to opportunities for wage employment, and Bandiera et al. (2017)
which studies TUP in Bangladesh and finds a positive impact 7 years after the
intervention, using a combination of experimental and non-experimental methods
to deal with the fact that the control group was treated in year 4.
I.

Experimental Design and Data

The NGO Bandhan ran the TUP program in West Bengal starting in 2007.
The poorest households were identified in two steps. First, residents across 120
village hamlets ranked households into five wealth quintiles. Among households
ranked in the bottom quintile Bandhan then verified eligibility per seven criteria:
(i) presence of an able-bodied female member (to manage the asset), (ii) no credit
access, (iii) landholding below 0.2 acres, (iv) no ownership of productive assets,
(v) no able-bodied male member, (vi) presence of school-aged children who are
working instead of attending school, and (vii) primary source of income being
informal labor or begging. Households had to meet the first two and at least
three of the remaining five criteria in order to be eligible for the TUP intervention. In total, nine hundred seventy eight (978) households were deemed eligible.
Roughly half of these (514) were randomly assigned to receive the intervention,
with stratification at the hamlet level. Of these, only 266 accepted treatment.
All reported estimates are intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates.
Households in the treatment group who chose to participate chose a productive
asset from a menu of options (2 cows, 4 goats, 1 cow and 2 goats, nonfarm microenterprise inventory, etc). About 82% chose livestock. In addition to the asset
they received weekly consumption support for 30-40 weeks3 , access to savings,
and weekly visits from Bandhan staff over a span of 18 months. These visits
3 The exact duration was 30 weeks for households receiving goats and 40 weeks for households receiving cows. The allowance of Rs.90/week ($7.6 in 2007 USD PPP) was meant to aid subsistence.

