The Selection of Talent
Experimental and Structural Evidence from Ethiopia∗

Girum Abebe†, A. Stefano Caria‡, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina§
November 25, 2020

Abstract
We study how search frictions in the labour market affect firms’ ability to recruit talented workers. In a field experiment in Ethiopia, we show that an employer can attract
more talented applicants by offering a small monetary incentive for making a job application. Estimates from a structural model suggest that the intervention is effective because
the cost of making a job application is large, and positively correlated with jobseeker ability. We provide evidence that this positive correlation is driven by dynamic selection. In
a second experiment, we show that local recruiters underestimate the positive impacts
of application incentives.
∗

We are grateful to Abi Adams, Arun Advani, Nava Ashraf, Oriana Bandiera, Vittorio Bassi, Gaurav

Chiplunkar, Stefano DellaVigna, David Eil, Marcel Fafchamps, Erica Field, James Fenske, Simon Franklin,
Douglas Gollin, Clément Imbert, Supreet Kaur, Philipp Kircher, Rocco Macchiavello, Jeremy Magruder, David
McKenzie, Guy Michaels, Paul Niehaus, Barbara Petrongolo, Simon Quinn, Imran Rasul, Chris Roth, Yared
Seid, Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse, Chris Woodruff, Liam Wren-Lewis, Yanos Zylberberg and seminar audiences at NBER Summer Institute, BREAD/CEPR/STICERD/TCD (LSE), Warwick, Toulouse, Cornell Dyson,
Sciences Po, PSE, McGill, IFS, NEUDC (Tufts), Mannheim, Oxford, Bristol, Essex, Royal Holloway, Cologne,
Ohlstadt for helpful comments. We thank Ian Jewitt for invaluable discussion of the theoretical model. Koen
Maskaant and Alemayehu Woldu provided outstanding research assistance. The project would not have been
possible without the support of Rose Page, Simon Quinn, CSAE and EDRI. We acknowledge funding from the
IGC (Project No. 1-VCC-VETH-VXXXX-32304) and the John Fell Fund. The trial was registered on the AEA
RCT registry (AEARCTR-0001900).
†
World Bank. Email: gtefera@worldbank.org.
‡
University of Warwick. stefano.caria@warwick.ac.uk, Web: www.stefanocaria.com.
§
Our World in Data and University of Oxford. Email: esteban@ourworldindata.org.

Selection problems occur everywhere in society. Firms want to hire talented workers; universities need to attract competent students; welfare programs have to select
poor recipients. A key insight that often guides the design of selection policies is that
a costly application process can improve selection by discouraging the participation of
unwanted candidates. This logic underpins ordeal mechanisms in welfare programs
(Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982; Alatas et al., 2016) and is often applied in recruitment
and marketing (Ashraf et al., 2010; Bandiera et al., 2011; Alonso, 2018). In this paper,
we show experimentally that the opposite is true in an important economic context —
decreasing application costs significantly improves selection. Our results are driven by
the fact that high-ability candidates face on average higher application costs. We quantify this positive correlation between applicant ability and application costs, provide
evidence on the mechanism that generates it, and show how it can be leveraged for
policy.
Our evidence comes from studying an employer who wants to attract talented workers for a clerical position in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. There are two important features
in this context. First, job search and application costs are high on average; formal jobs
require an application in person, which is time consuming and often requires the use
of public transport. Second, these costs are heterogenous, as individuals have different
access to liquidity and live at a varying distance from employers.
Using unique high-frequency data on job search and employment, we document
that this heterogeneity generates a dynamic selection effect. High-ability individuals who face relatively low application costs find work faster and stop searching for
work earlier than individuals who have similar ability, but face higher application costs.
Thus, over time, a positive correlation between ability and application costs emerges
among individuals searching for work.1 This correlation overturns the standard intuition on the screening role of application costs and suggests that lowering costs may
actually be a beneficial policy for an employer in this market. We test this prediction
empirically with our experiment.
In the experiment, the employer reduces application costs by offering a small monetary payment to all job applicants. This monetary incentive is worth 4.5 USD and is
calibrated to reimburse applicants for both transport costs — an in-person application
is required for this position — and the opportunity cost of time. In a second treatment,
the employer doubles the wage offer but does not provide any financial incentive for
applications. The expected value of the wage increase is 105 USD. The employer ran1

At the end of the paper, we present evidence from a number of studies suggesting that a similar

correlation may be found in other contexts as well, in both developed and developing countries.

2

domises the offer of these two treatments over the sample of individuals who call to
inquire about the position.
Our key finding is that the application incentive improves the quality of the applicant
pool. We measure applicant ability through standardised tests of cognitive and noncognitive ability, job-specific experience, and GPA (a measure of academic achievement
widely used as a proxy of ability in this context).2 Applicants from the application incentive group have higher cognitive ability and GPA compared to control applicants,
and similar levels of non-cognitive ability and experience. The ability gains occur across
the whole distribution of ability and are particularly large at the top. GPA and cognitive ability among the highest-scoring applicants invited for an interview increase by
.5 and .3 standard deviations, respectively. The number of top applicants (defined as
those with cognitive ability above the 90th percentile of the control group distribution)
doubles. We also find that raising the wage increases average applicant ability. The
magnitude of this effect is similar to the impact of the application incentive, although
the two interventions operate through different mechanisms, as we discuss in detail
below.
These findings surprise local employers. To show this, we sample 196 recruiters
in the same market and ask them to predict the effect of the application incentive, after being informed of the characteristics of the applicant pool in the control and high
wage conditions (DellaVigna and Pope, 2016). The majority of employers underestimate the effect of application incentives and the average employer incorrectly expects
this intervention to decrease applicant quality. However, when asked to invite selected
jobseekers to make an application at their firm on the basis of anonymised CVs, employers strongly prefer the applicants from the incentive treatment over the applicants
from the other two experimental groups. This gives us further evidence that application incentives attract applicants that are preferred by employers.
The treatment effect on ability is driven by women, and by those jobseekers who are
currently unemployed and less-experienced — all groups that do not usually perform
well in the labour market. This is not the case for the high wage treatment. This suggests
that the application incentive does not increase ability at the cost of attracting individuals who have better outside options and, hence, a lower likelihood of accepting and
keeping the job. On the contrary, this intervention mostly taps the pool of low-income
jobseekers who stand to benefit the most from the job. To explore this point further, we
2

We use the Raven and Stroop tests for cognitive ability (Schmidt and Hunter, 1998). For non-cognitive

skills we administer the Big-5 personality test and the Grit scale (John and Srivastava, 1999; Duckworth
et al., 2007). To identify job-specific experience, we follow Autor and Handel (2013) and collect measures
of experience in several relevant tasks.

3

generate an individual measure of the net present value of the experiment’s job using
a simple calibration framework and a Post-LASSO forecast of each individual’s market
wage (Belloni et al., 2014). We find that the increase in ability is significantly larger for
the group of jobseekers that values the job the most.
We rule out several potential explanations for our findings that are not related to
job application costs. First, the interventions could induce individuals to exert greater
test effort. To study this, we administer a task that requires effort, but very little ability.
We do not find significant differences in performance on this task, which provides evidence against differential test effort. The positive impacts on GPA, a measure of ability
determined before the interventions, further support this conclusion. Second, the application incentive could help individuals overcome self-control problems. However,
we find that incentive group applicants are as likely to be present biased as control
group applicants, which is inconsistent with this explanation. Third, subjects could
misinterpret the offer of the incentive as a signal about their quality or about the tightness of the labour market. Contrary to this hypothesis, we show that the incentive does
not affect subjects’ expectations about how long it will take them to find a new job, or
the wage that this new job would pay. We also find that the incentive is associated with
only minor changes in beliefs about the attributes of the job. We estimate that these
changes can account for only 5 percent of the total effect of the application incentive.
To shed light on the structural features of the labour market that drive our reducedform results we propose a simple model of application decisions. The model captures
two key frictions in job search: application costs and uncertainty about the probability
of being offered the job. There is only one type of vacancy, but we allow for worker
heterogeneity — jobseekers differ in terms of their ability, the magnitude of the application costs they face, and the benefit that they derive from being offered the job. Using
this model, we show formally that the incentive can attract better applicants in markets
where higher-ability jobseekers face larger application costs.
We identify and structurally estimate the key parameters of the model using the
exogenous variation generated by the experiment (DellaVigna, 2018). The simulated
moments closely track the empirical moments used for estimation. For example, we fit
all application rates with less than one percentage point of error. Further, the model
can match a key non-targeted moment — jobseekers’ assessment of the probability of
receiving a job offer — and replicates non-targeted patterns of the data such as the fact
that control applicants are negatively selected.
We estimate that application costs are large and, consistently with our initial descriptive evidence, positively correlated with jobseeker ability. For the group of indi-

4

viduals who value the job the most, the correlation between application costs and jobseeker ability is .57. The magnitude of application costs is also substantial. At the mean,
application costs amount to 13.5 percent of the monthly wage for the same group of
jobseekers. These central findings are robust to the use of different assumptions about
the information available to jobseekers, alternative sets of empirical moments, and different restrictions on parameter heterogeneity.3 Using a local estimate of the value of
cognitive ability, we calculate that for the average firm in this market the internal rate
of return (IRR) of the application incentive is 9.8 percent. This is much higher than the
IRR of the high wage treatment, which is a costlier intervention. However, this IRR
estimate is somewhat imprecise: the 90 percent bootstrapped confidence interval has
a lower bound of -18.7 percent and an upper bound of 38.3 percent. Through counterfactual policy analysis, we show that the IRR increases substantially and becomes
significantly different from zero when the incentive is either (i) targeted to the demographics that drive the treatment effects (e.g. women) or (ii) offered conditional on a
good performance on the selection test.
Our results make several contributions to the literature. First, we highlight that upfront costs can worsen selection in an important economic context. To our knowledge,
ours is the first worker selection experiment that manipulates application costs. Some
recent experiments in developing and developed countries have manipulated the wage,
or workers’ expectations about the wage (Dal Bó et al., 2013; Deserranno, 2019; Belot et
al., 2017; Ashraf et al., 2018). These studies typically find that higher wages attract better applicants. For example, Ashraf et al. (2018) show that offering career incentives
enables the Zambian government to recruit more talented nurses.4 A number of papers set in the US have also studied how various contract features affect applications
decisions (Flory et al., 2014; Mas and Pallais, 2016). Finally, a recent paper by Hardy and
McCasland (2017) studies the experimental placement of apprentices in small firms in
Ghana and finds evidence consistent with hiring frictions. None of these studies directly varies applications costs. Our findings highlight that, when jobseekers find it
costly to participate in the labour market, firms may hire better workers if they reduce
application costs.
Second, we contribute to a recent, growing literature that studies frictions in the
3

A potential concern is that unobserved variation in the value of the job may inflate the estimates of

application costs and of the cost-ability correlation. While we cannot fully rule out this possibility, we
show that our key results are robust to the use of two different estimation strategies that plausibly reduce
this unobserved variation.
4
An exception is Deserranno (2019), who finds that higher expected salaries select less motivated
candidates for a non-profit organisation in Uganda.

5

allocation of talent. Previous studies have focused on the role of discrimination (Hsieh
et al., 2013), migration costs (Bryan and Morten, 2015; Imbert and Papp, 2016; Lagakos
et al., 2017), housing market failures (Hsieh and Moretti, 2015), and corruption (Weaver,
2016). We provide original empirical evidence on the importance of search frictions —
in particular, frictions in the job-application process. These frictions have been the focus
of several theoretical papers, but direct evidence on their magnitude has been limited to
date (Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Marimon and Zilibotti, 1999; Rogerson et al., 2005;
Paserman, 2008; Galenianos et al., 2011). A unique feature of our study — and a key
contribution to this literature — is that search frictions are identified using exogenous
experimental variation.
Our findings are consistent with those of an emerging literature that studies spatial
frictions in urban labor markets. This literature shows that across a range of different
contexts — including the US, Ethiopia and South Africa — transport subsidies increase
job search intensity and impact labor market outcomes (Phillips, 2014; Franklin, 2017;
Abebe et al., 2020; Banerjee and Sequeira, 2020). These papers, however, do not observe
the counterfactual workers that would have been attracted by firms in the absence of
the program, and thus do not capture changes in the selection of talent.5 Our study,
on the other hand, documents that decreasing application costs enables employers to
attract higher-ability applicants, by incentivising a pool of female, inexperienced, unemployed jobseekers that are unlikely to quickly secure good positions otherwise. This
suggest that job search assistance policies may have positive impacts on the allocation
of talent and motivates the implementation of new market-level evaluations designed
to investigate these effects (Crépon et al., 2013).
Lastly, our results highlight that managers do not have accurate beliefs about the returns to different recruitment practices and may thus fail to optimise firms’ recruitment
policies. Providing information to managers may thus be a cost-effective intervention
in this context. These results contribute to the nascent literature on behavioural firms
(DellaVigna and Pope, 2016; DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2017; Kremer et al., 2018).

I

Context

In this section we describe the labour market in Addis Ababa from the point of view of
both firms and workers. We rely both on descriptive statistics from our data on jobseek5

Crépon and Van den Berg (2016) and McKenzie (2017a) offer recent reviews of the job search assis-

tance literature. Additionally, there is a relevant literature at the intersection of urban and labour economics that studies spatial frictions that result from urban segregation, mostly in developed countries,
which is summarised in Gobillon et al. (2007) and Zenou (2009).

6

