Discrete Choice under Risk with Limited Consideration
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0253.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: discrete choice, limited consideration, semi-nonparametric identification

Page 1 of 77

Discrete Choice under Risk with Limited Consideration
By Levon Barseghyan, Francesca Molinari, and Matthew
Thirkettle*
This paper is concerned with learning decision makers’ preferences
using data on observed choices from a finite set of risky alternatives. We propose a discrete choice model with unobserved heterogeneity in consideration sets and in standard risk aversion. We obtain sufficient conditions for the model’s semi-nonparametric point
identification, including in cases where consideration depends on
preferences and on some of the exogenous variables. Our method
yields an estimator that is easy to compute and is applicable in
markets with large choice sets. We illustrate its properties using a
dataset on property insurance purchases.

This paper is concerned with learning decision makers’ (DMs) preferences using data on observed choices from a finite set of risky alternatives with monetary
outcomes. The prevailing empirical approach to study this problem merges expected utility theory (EUT) models with econometric methods for discrete choice
analysis. Standard EUT assumes that the DM evaluates all available alternatives
and chooses the one yielding the highest expected utility. The DM’s risk aversion
is determined by the concavity of her Bernoulli utility function. The set of all
alternatives – the choice set – is assumed to be observable by the researcher.
We depart from this standard approach by proposing a discrete choice model
with unobserved heterogeneity in preferences and unobserved heterogeneity in
consideration sets. Specifically, preferences satisfy the classic Single Crossing
Property (SCP) of Mirrlees (1971) and Spence (1974), central to important studies of decision making under risk.1 That is, the preference order of any two
* Barseghyan: Department of Economics, Cornell University, 456 Uris Hall, 109 Tower Rd, Ithaca, NY
14853, lb247@cornell.edu. Molinari: Department of Economics, Cornell University, 458 Uris Hall, 109
Tower Rd, Ithaca, NY 14853, fm72@cornell.edu. Thirkettle: Department of Economics, Rice University,
430 Kraft Hall, 6100 Main St, Houston, TX 77005, mt77@rice.edu. We are grateful to Liran Einav, three
anonymous referees, Abi Adams, Jose Apesteguia, Miguel Ballester, Arthur Lewbel, Chuck Manski, and
Jack Porter for useful comments and constructive criticism. For comments and suggestions we thank
the participants to the 2017 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum on Stochastic Choice, the 2018 Cornell
Conference “Identification and Inference in Limited Attention Models”, the 2018 Penn State-Cornell
Conference on Econometrics and IO, the 2018 GNYMA Conference, the 2019 ASSA meetings, the IFS
2019 “Consumer Behaviour: New Models, New Methods” Conference, and to seminars at Stanford,
Berkeley, UCL, Wisconsin, Bocconi, and Duke. Part of this research was carried out while Barseghyan and
Molinari were on sabbatical leave at the Department of Economics at Duke University, whose hospitality
is gratefully acknowledged. We gratefully acknowledge support from National Science Foundation grant
SES-1824448 and from the Institute for Social Sciences at Cornell University.
1 E.g., Apesteguia, Ballester and Lu (2017); Chiappori et al. (2019). While our focus is on decision
making under risk, the SCP property is satisfied in many contexts, ranging from single agent models
with goods that can be unambiguously ordered based on quality, to multiple agents models (e.g., Athey
(2001)).

1

Page 2 of 77

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

alternatives switches only at one value of the preference parameter.2 Given her
unobserved preference parameter, each DM evaluates only the alternatives in her
unobserved consideration set, which is a subset of the choice set.
Our first contribution is to provide a general framework for point identification
of these models. Our analysis relies on two types of observed data variation. In the
first case, we assume that the data include a single (common) excluded regressor
affecting the utility of each alternative. In the second case, we assume that each
alternative has its own excluded regressor. In both cases, the excluded regressor(s) is independent of unobserved preference heterogeneity. When the excluded
regressor(s) also has large support it becomes a “special regressor” (Lewbel, 2000,
2014). For reasons we explain, the case of the single common excluded regressor is
the most demanding from an identification standpoint. Nonetheless, under classic conditions for identification of full-consideration discrete choice models (see,
e.g., Lewbel, 2000; Matzkin, 2007) and the SCP, we obtain semi-nonparametric
identification of the preference distribution given basically any consideration set
formation mechanism (henceforth, consideration mechanism).3 We also prove
identification of the consideration mechanism for the widely used Alternativespecific Random Consideration (ARC) model of Manski (1977) and Manzini and
Mariotti (2014). The identification argument is constructive and applicable beyond the ARC model. We establish identification results for preferences that do
not require large support of the excluded regressor(s). We also show that identification of both preferences and the consideration mechanism is attainable when
consideration depends on preferences. In particular, we introduce (i) binary consideration types, and (ii) proportionally shifting consideration, both of which can
capture the notion that the DM’s attention probabilistically shifts from riskier
to safer alternatives as her risk aversion increases. In these cases, identification
requires that the distribution of the preference parameter admits a continuous
density function.
We can significantly expand our results with alternative-specific excluded regressors. First, we can allow for essentially unrestricted dependence of consideration on preferences without assuming that the excluded regressors have large
support. Second, we show that consideration can depend both on preferences
and on some excluded regressors. We show this for two cases. In the first case,
there is one alternative (the default) that is always considered. The probability of
considering other alternatives can depend on the default-specific excluded regressor. This is a generalization of the models in Heiss et al. (2016); Ho, Hogan and
Scott Morton (2017); Abaluck and Adams (2020), where the consideration mechanism only allows for the possibility that either the default or the entire choice set
2 The EUT framework satisfies the SCP, which requires that if a DM with a certain degree of risk
aversion prefers a safer lottery to a riskier one, then all DMs with higher risk aversion also prefer the
safer lottery.
3 The identification results are semi-nonparametric because we specify the utility function up to a
DM-specific preference parameter. We establish nonparametric identification of the distribution of the
latter.

Page 3 of 77

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

DISCRETE CHOICE UNDER LIMITED CONSIDERATION

3

is considered. We, however, allow for each subset of the choice set containing the
default to have its own probability of being drawn and this probability can vary
with the DM’s preferences. In the second case, we allow the consideration of each
alternative to depend on its own excluded regressor, but not on the regressors of
other alternatives (Goeree, 2008; Abaluck and Adams, 2020; Kawaguchi, Uetake
and Watanabe, 2020). In addition, consideration may depend on preferences – a
feature unique to our paper.
Our second contribution is to provide a simple method to compute our likelihoodbased estimator. Its computational complexity grows polynomially in the number
of parameters governing the consideration mechanism. Because the SCP generates a natural ordering of alternatives akin to vertical product differentiation, our
method does not require enumerating all possible subsets of the choice set. If
it did, the computational complexity would grow exponentially with the size of
the choice set. Moreover, we compute the utility of each alternative only once
for a given value of the preference parameter, gaining enormous computational
advantage similar to that of importance-sampling methods.
Our third contribution is to elucidate the applicability and the advantages of
our framework over the standard application of full consideration random utility
models (RUMs) with additively separable unobserved heterogeneity (e.g., Mixed
Logit). First, our model can generate zero shares for non-dominated alternatives.
Second, the model has no difficulty explaining relatively large shares of dominated
alternatives. Third, in markets with many choice domains, our model can match
not only the marginal but also the joint distribution of choices across domains.
Forth, our framework is immune to an important criticism by Apesteguia and
Ballester (2018) against using standard RUMs to study decision making under
risk. As these authors note, combining standard EUT with additive noise results in non-monotonicity of choice probabilities in the risk preferences, a clearly
undesirable feature.
Random preference models like the ones we consider are random utility models
as envisioned by McFadden (1974) (for a textbook treatment see Manski, 2009).
We show that our random preference models can be written as RUMs with unobserved heterogeneity in risk aversion and with an additive error that has a discrete
distribution with support {−∞, 0}. Then, it is natural to draw parallels with the
Mixed (random coefficient) Logit model (e.g., McFadden and Train, 2000). In
our setting, the Mixed Logit boils down to assuming that, given the DM’s risk
aversion, her evaluation of an alternative equals its expected utility summed with
an unobserved heterogeneity term capturing the DM’s idiosyncratic taste for unobserved characteristics of that alternative. However, in some markets it is hard
to envision such characteristics.4 We show that limited consideration models and
4 Many insurance contracts are identical in all aspects except for the coverage level and price, e.g.,
employer provided health insurance, auto, or home insurance offered by a single company. In other
contexts, unobservable characteristics may affect choice mostly via consideration – as we model – rather
than via “additive noise”. E.g., a DM may only consider those supplemental prescription drug plans that
cover specific medications.

Page 4 of 77

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

the Mixed Logit generate several contrasting implications. First, the Mixed Logit
generally implies that each alternative has a positive probability of being chosen, while a limited consideration model can generate zero shares by setting the
consideration probability of a given alternative to zero. Second, the Mixed Logit
satisfies a Generalized Dominance Property that we derive: if for any degree of
risk aversion alternative j has lower expected utility than either alternative k
or l, then the probability of choosing j must be no larger than the probability
of choosing k or l. Limited consideration models do not necessarily abide Generalized Dominance. Third, in limited consideration models choice probabilities
depend on the ordinal expected utility rankings of the alternatives, while in the
Mixed Logit it depends on the cardinal ranking. This difference implies that
choice probabilities may be monotone in risk preferences in the limited consideration models we propose, while in the Mixed Logit they are not (Apesteguia and
Ballester, 2018).
We illustrate our method in a study of households’ deductible choices across
three lines of insurance: auto collision, auto comprehensive, and home (all perils).
We aim to estimate the distribution of risk preferences and the consideration
parameters and to assess the resulting fit of the models. We find that the ARC
model does a remarkable job at matching the distribution of observed choices, and
because of its aforementioned properties, outperforms the Mixed Logit. Under the
ARC model, we find that although households are on average strongly risk averse,
they consider lower coverages more often than higher coverages. We also find
support for proportionally shifting consideration. In particular, risk-neutral DMs
consider each of the safer alternatives 15% (11%) less often than do extremely
risk averse DMs (DMs with median risk aversion).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the model of DMs’
preferences in Section I, and study identification in Section II. In Section III we
describe the computational advantages of our approach. Section IV compares
our model to the Mixed Logit. Section V presents our empirical application.
Section VI contextualizes our contribution relative to the extant literature and
offers concluding remarks.
I.
A.

Preferences

Decision Making under Risk in a Market Setting: An Example

Consider as an example the following insurance market, which mimics the setting of our empirical application. There is an underlying risk of a loss that occurs
with probability µ that may vary across DMs. A finite number of alternatives
are available to insure against this loss. Conditional on risk type, i.e., given µ,
each alternative j ∈ D ≡ {1, . . . , D} is fully characterized by the pair (dj , pj ).
The first element is the insurance deductible, which is the DM’s out of pocket
expense in the case a loss occurs. Deductibles are decreasing with index j, and all
deductibles are less than the lowest realization of the loss. The second element is

Page 5 of 77

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

DISCRETE CHOICE UNDER LIMITED CONSIDERATION

5

the price (insurance premium), which also varies across DMs. For each DM there
is a baseline price p̄ that determines prices for all alternatives faced by the DM
according to the multiplication rule pj = gj · p̄+δ. Lower deductibles provide more
coverage and cost more, so gj is increasing with j. Both gj and δ are invariant
across DMs. The lotteries that DMs face are Lj (x) ≡ (−pj , 1 − µ; −pj − dj , µ),
where x ≡ p̄. DMs are expected utility maximizers. Given initial wealth w, the
expected utility of deductible lottery Lj (x) is
Uν (Lj (x)) = (1 − µ) uν (w − pj ) + µuν (w − pj − dj ) ,
where uν (·) is a Bernoulli utility function defined over final wealth states. We
assume that uν (·) belongs to a family of utility functions that are fully characterized by a scalar ν (e.g. Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA), Constant
Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA), or Negligible Third Derivative (NTD)), which
varies across DMs.5
Given the risk type, the relationship between risk aversion and prices is standard. At sufficiently high p̄, less coverage is always preferred to more coverage for all ν on the support: Uν (L1 (x)) > Uν (L2 (x)) > · · · > Uν (LD (x)).
At sufficiently low p̄, we have the opposite ordering for all ν on the support:
Uν (LD (x)) > Uν (LD−1 (x)) > · · · > Uν (L1 (x)). At moderate prices, for each
pair of deductible lotteries j < k there is a cutoff value cj,k (x) in the interior of
ν’s support, found by solving Uν (Lj (x)) = Uν (Lk (x)) for ν. On the left of this
cutoff the higher deductible is preferred and on the right the lower deductible is
preferred. In other words, cj,k (x) is the unique coefficient of risk aversion that
makes the DM indifferent between Lj (x) and Lk (x), known to the researcher
at any given x. Those with lower ν choose the riskier alternative Lj (x), while
those with higher ν choose the safer alternative Lk (x). Provided Uν (·) is smooth
in ν, cj,k (x) is smooth in x. In fact, under CARA, CRRA, or NTD, cj,k (x) is
a continuously differentiable monotone function. The prices are such that, under CARA, CRRA, or NTD, whenever Uν (L1 (x)) > Uν (Lj (x)) it is also the
case that Uν (L1 (x)) > Uν (Lj+1 (x)).6 As we show below, this can be stated as
c1,j (x) < c1,j+1 (x). That is, if the DM’s risk aversion is so low that she prefers
the riskiest lottery to a safer one, then she also prefers it to an even safer one. Finally, there are no three-way ties. That is, for a given x there are no alternatives
{j, k, l} such that Uν (Lj (x)) = Uν (Lk (x)) = Uν (Ll (x)).7
B.

Preferences with Single Crossing Property

There is a continuum of DMs. Each of them faces a choice among a finite
number of alternatives, i.e., a choice set, which is denoted D = {1, . . . , D}. The
5 Under CRRA, it is implied that DMs’ initial wealth is known to the researcher. NTD utility is
defined in Cohen and Einav (2007) and in Barseghyan et al. (2013).
6 We analytically verify this claim for our application in Online Appendix B, but it can also be checked
numerically for any given dataset.
7 It is straightforward to very this condition, and we do so in our application.

