Can Network Theory-based Targeting Increase Technology
Adoption?
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0295.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: O16, O13

Page 1 of 60

Can Network Theory-based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?

By LORI BEAMAN, ARIEL BENYISHAY, JEREMY MAGRUDER AND AHMED MUSHFIQ
MOBARAK*
Can targeting information to network-central farmers induce more adoption of a
new agricultural technology? By combining social network data and a field
experiment in 200 villages in Malawi, we find that targeting central farmers is
important to spur the diffusion process. We also provide evidence of one explanation
for why centrality matters: a diffusion process governed by complex contagion. Our
results are consistent with a model in which many farmers need to learn from
multiple people before they adopt themselves. This means that without proper
targeting of information, the diffusion process can stall and technology adoption
remains perpetually low.

* Beaman: Department of Economics and Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, Evanston IL (email: lbeaman@northwestern.edu); BenYishay: Department of Economics, College of William and Mary (email: abenyishay@wm.edu); Magruder,
Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California-Berkeley (email: jmagruder@berkeley.edu); and Mobarak: Yale University
(ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu). We thank the CEGA/JPAL Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative (ATAI) and 3ie for financial support.
Beaman acknowledges support by the National Science Foundation under grant no. 1254380. We gratefully acknowledge the support and
cooperation of Paul Fatch, Readwell Musopole and many other staff members of the Malawi Ministry of Agriculture. Thomas Coen, Niall
Kelleher, Maria Jones, Ofer Cohen, Allen Baumgardner-Zuzik, and the IPA-Malawi country office provided invaluable support for data
collection. Hossein Alidaee and provided excellent research assistance. We thank, without implicating, the editor and anonymous referees, Arun
Chandrasekhar, Matt Jackson, Kaivan Munshi, Chris Udry and numerous seminar audiences for very helpful comments. The study is registered
with the AEA registry under AEARCTR-0002017 (see Beaman et al. 2018). IRB approval was provided by Northwestern University
(STU00030251) and MIT (COUHES 1005003884). The data repository is openicpsr-130605 (see Beaman et al. 2021). All errors our own.

1

Page 2 of 60

1

Introduction

Technology diffusion is critical for growth and development (Alvarez et al. 2013, Perla and
Tonetti 2014). Information frictions are potential constraints to technology adoption, and social
relationships can serve as important vectors through which individuals learn about, and are then
convinced to adopt, new technologies. 1 Adoption of apparently productive new technologies has
often been frustratingly slow (Ryan and Gross 1943, Munshi 2007, Jack 2011, Qiao 2015). This
generates a policy priority: how can policy-makers effectively use social relationships to promote
technological diffusion? In this paper, we implement a field experiment in which we choose entry
points of information (seeds) into a social network and introduce a productive new agricultural
technology via those seeds across 200 villages in Malawi.
A rich empirical literature has documented faster diffusion when technologies were seeded
with people who are central in the network (Banerjee et al. 2013 in the context of microfinance in
India; Banerjee et al. 2019 in the context of immunization in India; Kim et al. 2015 looking at
health behaviors in Honduras). Targeting information to central agents in a network can even work
better than broadcasting information widely (Banerjee et al. 2020).
These empirical patterns that establish the importance of centrality may be surprising given
recent theoretical discussion by Akbarpour, Malladi and Saberi (2020) (henceforth AMS) which
shows that in many canonical diffusion models, adding a few additional seeds leads to more
diffusion than targeting central people to serve as seeds. The class of models AMS consider require
three conditions: first, agents must adopt a new behavior after a single exposure to someone else
who has adopted in the network. This is called ‘simple contagion’ and is the base for workhorse
models like the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model. Second, the time period for adoption
is sufficiently long; and finally, social interaction within the network is frequent. The intuition for
the AMS result is straightforward: whether central or not, people are connected to their local
network, so given enough time and enough talk, messages will spread through their connections
and quickly reach the well-connected people at the network’s center. Adding a few more seeds at
random increases the probability that at least one of them will be close to the well-connected center
to begin with, making targeting relatively unimportant. However, if any of the three criteria fail,

1

Large literatures in economics (Duﬂo and Saez 2003, Munshi 2008, Magruder 2010, Beaman 2012), finance (Bursztyn et al. 2013), sociology
(Rogers 1962), and medicine and public health (Coleman et al. 1957, Flodgren et al. 2007, Oster and Thornton 2012) show that information and
behaviors spread through inter-personal ties.

2

Page 3 of 60

then targeting may be necessary to prevent information frictions from curbing widespread
technological diffusion.
Our paper helps bridge the gap between these theoretical and empirical results. We
implemented a randomized controlled trial where we used different variants of the threshold model
of diffusion (e.g. Granovetter 1978, Centola and Macy 2007, Acemoglu et al. 2011) to choose
seeds. This creates a unifying framework which both generates variation in seed centrality across
treatment arms and also helps us explore why targeting may matter for technology diffusion.
Our experiment takes place in an important real-world context: agricultural extension
services in developing countries. Agricultural productivity growth in Africa has stalled (World
Bank 2008), in part because of a slow adoption rate of new technologies. Agricultural extension is
the key policy tool governments use to promote technology adoption (Anderson and Feder 2007),
and it often relies on social learning. 2 We partnered with the Ministry of Agriculture in Malawi to
run an experiment that could enhance the effectiveness of its extension services by partnering with
two “seed” farmers in each study village who could induce widespread social learning. The
experiment was implemented in 200 villages, with 50 villages in each of the four treatment groups.
The specific technology promoted, ‘pit planting’, has the potential to significantly improve maize
yields in arid areas of rural Africa. 3 It is a practice that was largely unknown in Malawi, and
learning is therefore crucial for the diffusion of this technology.
In the Benchmark treatment, extension agents chose the seeds as they normally would
(status quo or picking by experts). In the remaining treatment groups, we strategically chose the
seeds using detailed social network data we collected in every village. We ensured that selected
seeds in different treatments would inhabit different parts of the network by exploiting variations
on the threshold model of diffusion to suggest pairings of seeds that may be more or less effective,
given different underlying diffusion processes. In the second treatment group, we selected seeds
who would (in theoretical simulations) optimize diffusion over a 4-year period, if the diffusion
process is characterized by a complex contagion. Complex contagion is a diffusion process in
2
A large literature has established that social learning about agricultural practices influences the uptake of new technologies among farmers
(Griliches 1957, Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Munshi 2004, Bandiera and Rasul 2006, Conley and Udry 2010, Burlig and Stephens 2019, Islam
et al. 2019).
3
It has been shown to increase productivity by 40-100% in tests conducted under controlled conditions (Haggblade and Tembo 2003); in largesample field tests conducted under realistic “as implemented by government” conditions (BenYishay and Mobarak 2019), and using experimental
variation among villagers in the present study.

3

Page 4 of 60

which technology only diffuses when individuals are connected to at least two knowledgeable
farmers. The pair of seeds chosen by this complex contagion treatment are both central in the
network. Seed selection in the third treatment is the result of simulations of the simple contagion
variant of the threshold model, where farmers only need to know one knowledgeable farmer. In
simple diffusion, a single central seed will diffuse to the dense part of the network so that a second
seed is best used to diffuse to the more distant periphery. As a result, one of the seeds is networkcentral while the second person is typically more peripheral. This variant of the model is similar
to those considered in the AMS framework. In the final treatment group, we used geography to
proxy for social network data, to create a cheaper, “scalable” approach coupled with the complex
contagion model. These seeds are typically low centrality, but are close to each other in the
network.
During the 3-year period of the experiment, pit planting adoption grew from 0% to about
11% in the villages with two highly central seeds. This rate of increase in adoption is comparable
to the spread of some very profitable new agricultural technologies (e.g. Munshi 2007). Ryan and
Gross (1943) show that it took 10 years for hybrid seed corn to be adopted in Iowa in the 1930s.
The adoption rate is 3 percentage points lower in Benchmark villages in years 2 and 3, though only
the year 2 differences are statistically significant.
We also test whether the initial advantage of central seeding will likely dissipate over time
by examining another important metric: whether any farmers in the village other than the seeds
adopt. If there is no diffusion within the first three years, it is unlikely that conversation and
experience over longer time horizons will inspire broad technology adoption. We observe a critical
failure of expert-based seeding. There is no diffusion of pit planting in 45% of the Benchmark
villages after 3 years. In villages with two highly central seeds, there was a 56% greater likelihood
(p<0.01) that at least one person other than the seeds adopts the technology in the village, relative
to the Benchmark. The results clearly indicate that targeting central seeds was necessary to
generate adoption of pit planting in Malawi.
We then turn to understanding why central targeting was so important in this context. One
potential explanation is that the variant of the threshold model that we used to select seeds captures
the underlying diffusion process. AMS and Jackson and Storms (2018) demonstrate that targeting
on the basis of centrality is more important when there is complex contagion. We show that
different thresholds for technology adoption are naturally micro-founded through a naive Bayesian
4

Page 5 of 60

learning model, as we discuss in section 5.1. We anticipate that learning about a new agricultural
technology in a developing country is precisely a context in which agents may have a high
threshold. This fact would have clear policy relevance: if farmers need to learn from more than
one informed connection before they themselves adopt, this would generate a very slow and in
many cases permanently stalled adoption pattern, just as we observe in Benchmark villages.
Overcoming this problem would necessitate targeting central individuals, as in Banerjee et al
(2019).
The diffusion we observe demonstrates several empirical regularities consistent with
complex contagion. Though, we note that it is difficult to differentiate complex contagion from
other reasons that targeting multiple central farmers may improve technology adoption. We
observe three patterns suggested by complex contagion. First, a key insight from the threshold
model is that poor targeting could lead to a complete failure of adoption within the village, as we
see in our data. Second, consistent with our theory, we show that treatment effects are largest (i)
in villages where there is more to learn, because baseline knowledge was lowest, and (ii) among
farmers whose land is most suited to pit planting. Third, we use our farmer-level data to provide
direct evidence in support of complex contagion. We leverage the random treatment assignment
to identify that farmers who are connected to two seeds are more likely to learn about and adopt
pit planting than farmers connected to only one seed, holding network position constant.
The targeting method used in this paper is a proof of concept, relying on an expensive
method of collecting network data. As such, it is not intended to be practical or directly scalable.
The next step is to use cheaper ways to identify highly central individuals. One could use gossips
(Banerjee et al. 2019); cell phone data (Bjorkegren 2018, Blumenstock et al 2019) or other
administrative data (Bennett and Bergman 2020); or aggregated relational data from a sample of
individuals (Breza et al. 2020) to achieve this. 4
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start with the experimental setting and
design, along with details on the implementation of the intervention. Section 3 describes the data.
Section 4 presents the average treatment effects on pit planting adoption. In section 5, we propose
4

In our paper we did one lower cost method, the geography-based targeting strategy. It generated some gains in adoption relative to the
benchmark. However, physical proximity does not appear to be a good proxy for social connections in this context. A variety of other papers test
the ability of local institutions, such as nominations or focus groups, to identify useful partners: Kremer et al. (2011) identify and recruit
‘ambassadors’ to promote water chlorination in rural Kenya, Miller and Mobarak (2015) first market improved cookstoves to ‘opinion leaders’ in
Bangladeshi villages before marketing to others, and BenYishay and Mobarak (2018) incentivize ‘lead farmers’ and ‘peer farmers’ to partner with
agricultural extension officers in Malawi. We also develop an intuitive algorithm to identify central farmers that can be implemented with a small
number of interviews, and simulations on our data show that this method would generate large gains in technology adoption.

5

