Teenage Driving, Mortality, and Risky Behaviors
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0653.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
28-Feb-2021
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Huh, Jason; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Economics
Reif, Julian; University of Illinois, Finance
Keywords: I10, H75, R40

Page 1 of 57

Dear Editorial Board,
I am writing to submit a Disclosure Statement for my co-authored manuscript, “Teenage Driving,
Mortality, and Risky Behaviors,” for consideration at AER: Insights. I declare that I have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
We did not seek IRB approval for this project as it is based on previously collected data and thus falls outside
of the scope of what constitutes human subjects research.

Sincerely,
Julian Reif

Page 2 of 57

Dear Editorial Board,
I am writing to submit a Disclosure Statement for my co-authored manuscript, “Teenage Driving,
Mortality, and Risky Behaviors,” for consideration at AER: Insights. I declare that I have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
We did not seek IRB approval for this project as it is based on previously collected data and thus falls outside
of the scope of what constitutes human subjects research.

Sincerely,
Jason Huh

Page 3 of 57

Teenage Driving, Mortality, and Risky Behaviors∗
Jason Huh

Julian Reif

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

University of Illinois
and NBER

February 2021

Abstract
We investigate the effect of teenage driving on mortality and risky behaviors in the
United States using a regression discontinuity design. We estimate that total mortality
rises by 5.84 deaths per 100,000 (15%) at the minimum legal driving age cutoff, driven
by an increase in motor vehicle fatalities of 4.92 deaths per 100,000 (44%). We also
find that poisoning deaths, which are caused primarily by drug overdoses, rise by 0.31
deaths per 100,000 (29%) at the cutoff and that this effect is concentrated among
females. Our findings show that teenage driving contributes to sex differences in risky
drug use behaviors.
JEL Codes: I1, H75, R4
Keywords: teenage driving, risky behaviors, drug overdoses, poisonings

∗

We are thankful for comments from Kitt Carpenter, Tatyana Deryugina, Carlos Dobkin, Yingying Dong,
Michael Frakes, Don Fullerton, Jonathan Hall, Ellen Meara, Nolan Miller, Nicolas Ziebarth, and participants
at the Chicago Booth Junior Health Economics Summit and the UIUC Applied Economics Workshop.

1

Page 4 of 57

1

Introduction

Suicides and motor vehicle accidents are the two leading causes of death for teenagers in
the United States. Both often involve substance abuse, which itself is also a leading cause
of teenage death. Over 25% of all teenage hospitalizations are related to mental health
or substance abuse disorders (Heslin and Elixhauser, 2016). Yet, the determinants of risky
behaviors among youth remain poorly understood, and what little we know about the drivers
of risky behaviors among adults may not apply to teenagers. For example, drug overdose
deaths among teenagers declined between 2007 and 2014, in stark contrast to the significant
nationwide increase in adult “deaths of despair” that has received much attention from
researchers (Case and Deaton, 2015, 2017).
We investigate the effects of teenage driving on mortality and risky behaviors. While
driving undoubtedly increases motor vehicle mortality risk, the magnitude of this risk is
hard to quantify. Moreover, driving enables teenagers to participate in unsupervised risky
behaviors away from home, which may in turn lead to changes in mental health or drug use
that have additional effects on mortality risk. Investigating these links can shed light on the
determinants of risky behaviors among youth. However, identifying the effects of driving on
teenage outcomes is challenging. Individual-level data on driving behaviors are scarce, and
comparing the behaviors of drivers to non-drivers is unlikely to yield causal estimates because
the decision to obtain a license is voluntary. In addition, detecting changes in important but
rare outcomes such as drug-related mortality requires large sample sizes.
We overcome these challenges by using a regression discontinuity (RD) approach to identify the causal effect of teenage driving on a number of outcomes.1 Our research design
exploits variation in driving eligibility caused by the minimum legal driving age (henceforth
“minimum driving age” or “MDA”), which creates large differences in the teenage driver
population on either side of the MDA cutoff. We employ a confidential dataset that includes information about month and year of birth for over 500,000 teenage deaths during
1983–2014, which enables us to compare mortality rates for teenagers just above the MDA
to mortality rates for teenagers just below the MDA. We estimate that driving eligibility
increases teenage mortality by 5.84 deaths per 100,000 (15%) at the MDA cutoff. This effect
is driven primarily by an increase in motor vehicle fatalities of 4.92 per 100,000 (44%).
We also estimate that teenage poisoning deaths rise by 0.314 deaths per 100,000 (29%)
at the cutoff. This poisoning effect is driven by a stark rise in female drug overdose deaths of
0.646 per 100,000 (78%) and an accompanying rise in female gas poisoning deaths of 0.127
1

Our analysis controls for the family-wise error rate in order to address the multiple inference concern
that arises when testing many hypotheses. See Section 4 for details.

2

Page 5 of 57

per 100,000 (82%).2 These deaths reflect changes in both suicides and accidental deaths,
although our analysis suggests that the increase in poisoning suicides reflects substitution
away from other methods of suicide. By contrast, we find no effect on male poisoning
deaths. This null effect is meaningfully precise: the 95% confidence interval rules out the
corresponding female estimate.
The most common MDA during our sample period is 16, which raises the concern that
our results might be driven by a “birthday effect” or some other regulation that takes effect
at age 16, such as the federal minimum legal working age or a state’s minimum school leaving
age. However, the discontinuities that we observe are long-lasting, which is inconsistent with
a temporary birthday effect, and we do not detect changes in the probability of working or
leaving school at the MDA cutoff. Furthermore, our main results are similar when we limit
our analysis to the subsample of states with MDAs other than 16. We therefore conclude
that the MDA is the causal mechanism underlying our results.
Youth risky behaviors differ significantly by sex. During our sample period, 29% of young
female deaths from suicides and accidents were caused by poisonings, compared to just 15%
for young males. Prior studies have also noted that poisonings make up a significantly larger
share of young female suicides than young male suicides (Ruch et al., 2019). Our results
reveal that teenage driving contributes to these behavioral differences among male and female
youth.
Much of the research on the causal determinants of drug abuse comes from studies of
adults. For example, several studies find that drug overdose deaths increase after the first
of the month and following the receipt of money, suggesting a causal relationship between a
“full wallet” and substance abuse (Phillips, Christenfeld and Ryan, 1999; Riddell and Riddell,
2006; Dobkin and Puller, 2007; Evans and Moore, 2012). Less is known about the causal
determinants of drug abuse among adolescents.3 Indeed, Gruber (2001) calls for economists
to pay more attention to the risk-taking behavior of youth, noting that while economic
incentives appear to matter, most of the variation remains unexplained. Anderson (2010),
who finds no effect of a Montana anti-drug advertising campaign on methamphetamine use
among highschoolers, emphasizes the need for further research on the determinants of illegal
2

During our sample period, about 80% of teenage poisoning deaths are caused by drug overdoses and
about 20% are caused by gas poisonings. Most gas poisoning deaths are caused by carbon monoxide.
3
Most of the prior literature on youth drug use focuses on tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana (e.g., Glied,
2002; Cawley, Markowitz and Tauras, 2004; Carpenter et al., 2019). Drug overdose deaths among teenagers,
however, are mostly caused by opioids (both illegal and prescription) and sedatives. The teenage driving
literature has investigated the effects of Graduated Driver Licensing laws on motor vehicle fatalities (Dee,
Grabowski and Morrisey, 2005; Morrisey et al., 2006; Karaca-Mandic and Ridgeway, 2010; Gilpin, 2019) and
on crime (Deza and Litwok, 2016), and has investigated the effects of the MDA on crash risk (Foss et al.,
2011; Chapman, Masten and Browning, 2014; Curry et al., 2015).

3

