Stock Market Wealth and the Real Economy: A Local Labor
Market Approach
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0208.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E21, E32, E44

Page 1 of 57

The author declares that no relevant or material financial interests relate to the research described
in “Stock Market Wealth and the Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Analysis.” No party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
11/23/2020

Page 2 of 57

The author declares that no relevant or material financial interests relate to the research described
in “Stock Market Wealth and the Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Analysis.” No party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

Alp Simsek
11/23/2020

Page 3 of 57

The author declares that no relevant or material financial interests relate to the research described
in “Stock Market Wealth and the Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Analysis.” No party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

Plamen T. Nenov
11/23/2020

Page 4 of 57

Stock Market Wealth and the Real Economy:
A Local Labor Market Approach
By Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Plamen T. Nenov, and Alp Simsek*
We provide evidence of the stock market consumption wealth effect
by using a local labor market analysis. An increase in local stock
wealth driven by aggregate stock prices increases local employment
and payroll in nontradable industries and in total, with no effect
on employment in tradable industries. In a model of geographic
heterogeneity in stock wealth, these responses imply an MPC of
3.2 cents per year and that a 20% increase in stock valuations,
unless countered by monetary policy, increases the aggregate labor
bill by at least 1.7% and aggregate hours by at least 0.7% two years
after the shock.
JEL: E44, E21, E32
Keywords: stock prices, consumption wealth effect, marginal
propensity to consume, employment, wages, regional heterogeneity,
time-varying risk premium, nominal rigidities, monetary policy
According to a recent textual analysis of FOMC transcripts by Cieslak and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2017), many U.S. policymakers believe that stock market fluctuations affect the labor market through a consumption wealth effect. In this
view, a decline in stock prices reduces the wealth of stock-owning households,
causing a reduction in spending and hence in employment. While apparently
an important driver of U.S. monetary policy, this channel has proved difficult to
establish empirically. The main challenge arises because stock prices are forwardlooking. Therefore, an anticipated decline in future economic fundamentals could
also lead to both a negative stock return and a subsequent decline in household
spending and employment.
We use a local labor market analysis to address this empirical challenge and
provide quantitative evidence on the stock market consumption wealth effect.
Our empirical strategy combines regional heterogeneity in stock market wealth
with aggregate movements in stock prices. This regional approach identifies the
causal effects under weaker assumptions than aggregate time-series analyses, while
* Chodorow-Reich: Harvard University Department of Economics and NBER (email: chodorowreich@fas.harvard.edu). Nenov: Norwegian Business School (BI) (email: plamen.nenov@bi.no). Simsek:
MIT Department of Economics, NBER, and CEPR (email: asimsek@mit.edu). We would like to thank
George-Marios Angeletos, Ricardo Caballero, Anthony DeFusco (discussant), Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Fabian Greimel (discussant), Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Kairong Xiao, numerous seminar participants,
and especially the editor Emi Nakamura and four anonymous referees for many helpful comments. Joel
Flynn and Katherine Silva provided excellent research assistance. Chodorow-Reich acknowledges support
from the Molly and Dominic Ferrante Economics Research Fund. Nenov would like to thank Harvard University and the NBER for their hospitality during the initial stages of the project. Simsek acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number SES-1455319.

1

Page 5 of 57

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

providing direct evidence that asset prices affect labor market outcomes, which
is of central interest to policymakers. In addition, our approach appropriately
accounts for heterogeneity in marginal propensities to consume (MPC) across
households—a feature emphasized in the recent literature—because the regional
labor market response already reflects the wealth-weighted average MPC across
stockholders in the region. Finally, we develop a heterogeneous area two-agent
New Keynesian model that relates the regional outcomes to the household-level
MPC out of stock wealth as well as to the aggregate labor market effects of
stock wealth changes. Interpreted through this model, our empirical estimates
map into a household-level annual MPC of 3.2 cents per dollar of stock wealth
and imply that annual aggregate payroll increases by 1.7% following a yearly
standard deviation increase in the stock market, unless countered by monetary
policy.
It helps to begin by describing the consumption wealth effect in our model
setting. The environment features a continuum of areas, a tradable good and a
nontradable good, stockholders and hand-to-mouth workers, and two factors of
production, capital and labor. The only heterogeneity across regions is in their
ownership of capital, which also equates to stock wealth. The aggregate price of
capital is endogenous and fluctuates due to changes in households’ beliefs about
the expected future productivity of capital. An increase in stock wealth increases
local spending on nontradable goods, and more so in areas with greater capital
ownership. Higher spending drives up the labor bill and increases labor in the
nontradable sector and in total. Local wages increase (weakly) more in high
wealth areas, which induces a (weak) fall in tradable labor.
In the data, we measure changes in county-level stock market wealth in three
steps. In the first step, we capitalize dividend income reported on tax returns
aggregated to the county level to arrive at a county-level measure of taxable stock
wealth. Our capitalization method improves on existing work such as in Saez and
Zucman (2016) by allowing for heterogeneity in dividend yields by wealth, which
we obtain using a sample of account-level portfolio holdings from a large discount
broker. In the second step, we adjust this measure of taxable stock wealth to
account for non-taxable (e.g., retirement) stock wealth, using information on the
relationship between taxable and total stock wealth and demographics in the
Survey of Consumer Finances. In the final step, we multiply the total county
stock wealth with the return on the market (CRSP value-weighted) portfolio and
a county-specific portfolio beta constructed from county demographic information
and variation in betas across the age distribution in the data from the discount
broker. This provides a measure of the change in county stock wealth driven by
the aggregate stock return. Motivated by our theoretical analysis, we then divide
this change by the county labor bill to arrive at our main regressor.
Our empirical specification identifies the effect of changes in stock wealth on
local labor market outcomes by exploiting the substantial variation in the aggregate stock return that occurs independent of other macroeconomic variables. In

