The Effects of Parental and Sibling Incarceration: Evidence
from Ohio
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0415.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: K14, K42, J13

Page 1 of 123

March 11, 2019
To Whom it May Concern:
This statement affirms that I have no financial interests that may be potentially impacted by the
findings in this paper.
Funding for this project was provided by the National Institute of Justice through the Graduate
Research Fellowship Program in the Social and Behavioral Sciences (2016-R2-CX-0022) and
the National Science Foundation through the Law & Social Sciences Fellowship (1628126). I
began this project while a graduate student, and received funding from National Science
Foundation’s Graduate Research Fellowship. None of these sources had any influence on the
paper’s content. Aside from these sources, I have not received any significant financial support
from interested parties who may have a financial, ideological, or political stake related to the
article.
I maintain no positions in any organization whose policy positions, goals, or financial interests
relate to the article.
IRB approval was obtained for this project from Northwestern University (IRB #
STU00202214). An IAA agreement between USC and Northwestern University extended this
approval to USC.
Sincerely,

Jeffrey Weaver
Assistant Professor of Economics
University of Southern California
jbweaver@usc.edu

Page 2 of 123

March 11, 2019
To Whom it May Concern:
This statement affirms that I have no financial interests that may be potentially impacted by the
findings in this paper.
Funding for this project was provided by the National Institute of Justice through the Graduate
Research Fellowship Program in the Social and Behavioral Sciences (2016-R2-CX-0022) and
the National Science Foundation through the Law & Social Sciences Fellowship (1628126). I
began this project while a graduate student, and received funding from Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada through its Doctoral Fellowship Awards. None of these
sources had any influence on the paper’s content. Aside from these sources, I have not received
any significant financial support from interested parties who may have a financial, ideological, or
political stake related to the article.
I maintain no positions in any organization whose policy positions, goals, or financial interests
relate to the article.
IRB approval was obtained for this project from Northwestern University (IRB #
STU00202214). Two IAA agreements with both UCB and USC extended the approval from
Northwestern University.
Sincerely,

Samuel Norris
Assistant Professor of Economics
University of Chicago, Harris School of Public Policy

Page 3 of 123

March 11, 2019
To Whom it May Concern:
This statement affirms that I have no financial interests that may be potentially impacted by the findings
in this paper.
Funding for this project was provided by the National Institute of Justice through the Graduate Research
Fellowship Program in the Social and Behavioral Sciences (2016-R2-CX-0022) and the National Science
Foundation through the Law & Social Sciences Fellowship (1628126). Neither source had any influence
on the paper’s content. Aside from these sources, I have not received any significant financial support
from interested parties who may have a financial, ideological, or political stake related to the article.
I maintain no positions in any organization whose policy positions, goals, or financial interests relate to
the article.
IRB approval was obtained for this project from Northwestern University (IRB # STU00202214). Two
IAA agreements with both UCB and USC extended the approval from Northwestern University.
Sincerely,

Matthew Pecenco
Graduate Student
University of California, Berkeley
pecenco@berkeley.edu

Page 4 of 123

The Eects of Parental and Sibling
Incarceration: Evidence from Ohio
Samuel Norris, Matthew Pecenco & Jerey Weaver∗
March 9, 2021

Abstract
Every year, millions of Americans experience the incarceration of a family member. Using 30 years of administrative data from Ohio and exploiting diering
incarceration propensities of randomly assigned judges, this paper provides the
rst quasi-experimental estimates of the eects of parental and sibling incarceration in the US. Parental incarceration has benecial eects on some important
outcomes for children, reducing their likelihood of incarceration by 4.9 percentage points and improving their adult neighborhood quality. While estimates
on academic performance and teen parenthood are imprecise, we reject large
positive or negative eects. Sibling incarceration leads to similar reductions in
criminal activity.

Norris: Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago. samnorris@uchicago.edu; Pecenco: Department of Economics, Brown University. matthew_pecenco@brown.edu; Weaver: Department of Economics, University of Southern California. jbweaver@usc.edu. We thank Joe Altonji, Carolina Arteaga, Kerwin Charles, Jennifer Doleac, Je Grogger, Jonathan Guryan, Seema
Jayachandran, Patrick Kline, Jens Ludwig, Aprajit Mahajan, Magne Mogstad, Emily Nix, Matthew
Notowidigdo, Guillaume Pouliot, Elisabeth Sadoulet, Megan Stevenson, Reed Walker, and Ebonya
Washington, as well as seminar participants at ACLEC, ASSA, NBER Summer Institute (Children), Northwestern, Ohio State, SEA, TX Crime conference, UC Berkeley, UC Riverside, UC San
Diego, UEA, and USC Gould for helpful comments and suggestions. This project would not have
been possible without the incredible assistance of David Bowling, Linda Brooks, Ed Ferenc, Mary
Ann Koster, Lisa Locklin, Kathy Lamb, Matt Linick, John Paulson, Brandi Seskes, and Lori Tyack,
who took the time to help us access the data and understand the institutional context. We thank
the Eviction Lab, and in particular Matt Desmond, James Hendrickson and Ashley Gromis, for
providing us with the evictions outcomes. Cheenar Gupte, Peijie Li, Daniela Santos-Cardenas and
Ruediger Schmidt provided excellent research assistance. Funding for this project was provided
by the National Institute of Justice through the Graduate Research Fellowship Program in the
Social and Behavioral Sciences (2016-R2-CX-0022) and the National Science Foundation through
the Law & Social Sciences Fellowship (1628126). Norris acknowledges generous nancial support
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada through its Doctoral Fellowship Awards, and Weaver from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.
This study includes data provided by Cleveland Metropolitan School District, but should not be
considered an endorsement of this study. All views expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reect the opinions of any of the funding organizations. Ohio Department of Health data
used in this study were obtained from Vital Records, Ohio Department of Health (ODH). Use of
these data does not imply ODH agrees or disagrees with any presentations, analyses, interpretations
or conclusions.
∗

Page 5 of 123

The United States has the highest rate of incarceration in the developed world, directly affecting millions of prisoners annually. Beyond prisoners, an even larger number of family and
community members are indirectly aected by incarceration. Advocates and academics have
primarily argued that the incarceration of a parent or sibling will have negative eects on
children as a result of the removal of social and economic support (Annie E Casey Foundation, 2016; Donohue, 2009). Due to the larger pool of people aected, these spillover eects of
incarceration could be even more important than the direct eects on the incarcerated.
On the other hand, there are several reasons why incarceration might have benecial
family spillovers.

Some children may be moved to more stable home environments when

a parent is incarcerated, especially if the parent is incarcerated for crimes that adversely
aect their children such as abuse.

Witnessing incarceration rst-hand could also increase

the salience of punishment and thus deter a child from future criminal activity. In the case
of siblings, incarceration may remove a criminogenic peer inuence.

The eect of familial

incarceration will vary from case to case: for some individuals, the negative mechanisms will
dominate, while the positive mechanisms will dominate for others. As a result, the net spillover
eect of incarceration is theoretically ambiguous, depending on the proportion of individuals
experiencing either positive or negative consequences.
Empirical evidence on the long-term spillover eects of incarceration in the United States
has been largely correlational, such as comparisons between children with and without incarcerated parents. Most of these studies nd negative eects of parental incarceration on outcomes
such as antisocial behavior, drug use, academic achievement, and criminality (e.g.

Murray,

Farrington and Sekol (2012), Roettger et al. (2011), Hagan and Foster (2012)).

However,

if children with incarcerated parents come from relatively disadvantaged households, these
estimates do not have causal interpretations and will be biased towards nding a negative
impact.

1

This lack of causal evidence is largely due to stringent data requirements. Causal estimates
require exogenous variation in incarceration, the ability to link family members to defendants,
and outcome data for the family members.

For long-term outcomes, the data must span

enough time to observe adult outcomes for those aected by family incarceration. To overcome

Other studies use panel data to estimate the eect of parental incarceration on short-run academic outcomes
around the time of parental incarceration. These papers nd minimal (Cho, 2009b) or even benecial eects
(Cho, 2009a; Billings, 2017) of parental incarceration.
1

1

