Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments: New Evidence from
Administrative Payroll Data
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0318.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E24, J31, Wage Stickiness

Page 1 of 75

Disclosure Statement:
I am writing the paper “Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments: New Evidence from Administrative
Payroll Data” in an academic capacity. However, I am also Co-Head of ADP Research Institute and
Vice President of ADP’s Corporate Strategy. The paper uses ADP data to explore nominal wage
adjustments. ADP approved the paper topic ex-ante. Additionally, ADP reviewed the paper prior to
distribution with the sole focus of making sure that the paper did not release information that would
compromise the privacy of their clients or would reveal proprietary information about the ADP
business model.
I have no other relevant or material financial interest that relate to the research described in this paper.
Sincerely
Ahu Yildirmaz

Page 2 of 75

Disclosure Statement:
The data for the paper “Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments: New Evidence from Administrative
Payroll Data” was provided by ADP, LLP. The data is proprietary and was provided to us at no cost
for research purposes. Per our use agreement, ADP approved the paper topic ex-ante. Additionally,
ADP reviewed the paper prior to distribution with the sole focus of making sure that the paper did not
release information that would compromise the privacy of their clients or would reveal proprietary
information about the ADP business model. We have noted this directly in the acknowledgements of
the paper. Finally, one of our co-authors is the Co-Head of ADP Research Institute and was
responsible for making the data available to researchers. ADP has shared the same data with other
researchers at Chicago, Princeton, MIT, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, and Cornell.
I have no other relevant or material financial interest that relate to the research described in this paper.
Sincerely
Erik Hurst

Page 3 of 75

Page 4 of 75

Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments:
New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data*
John Grigsby

Erik Hurst

Ahu Yildirmaz

September 29, 2020

Abstract
Using administrative payroll data from the largest U.S. payroll processing company,
we measure the extent of nominal wage rigidity in the United States. The data allow
us to define a worker’s per-period base contract wage separately from other forms
of compensation such as overtime premiums and bonuses. We provide evidence that
firms use base wages to cyclically adjust the marginal cost of their workers. Nominal
base wage declines are much rarer than previously thought with only 2% of job-stayers
receiving a nominal base wage cut during a given year. Approximately 35% of workers
receive no base wage change year over year. We document strong evidence of both
time and state dependence in nominal base wage adjustments. In addition, we provide
evidence that the flexibility of new hire base wages is similar to that of existing workers.
Collectively, our results can be used to discipline models of nominal wage rigidity.

* Grigsby:

Department of Economics, Northwestern University, 2211 Campus Dr, Evanston, IL 60208
(email: john.grigsby@northwestern.edu); Hurst: University of Chicago Booth School of Business, 5807 S
Woodlawn Ave, Chicago, IL 60637 (email: erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu); Yildirmaz: ADP, LLC, One ADP
Boulevard Roseland, NJ 07068 (email: Ahu.Yildirmaz@ADP.com). We thank Mark Aguiar, Susanto Basu,
Steve Davis, Fatih Guvenen, John Haltiwanger, Jonathon Hazell, Pete Klenow, Alan Krueger, Marianna
Kudlyak, Andre Kurmann, Alex Mas, Ben Schoefer, John Shea, Rob Shimer, Gary Solon, Joe Vavra, Emi
Nakamura and three anonymous referees for helpful comments. Per our use agreement, ADP approved the
paper topic ex-ante. Additionally, ADP reviewed the paper prior to distribution with the sole focus of
making sure that the paper did not release information that would compromise the privacy of their clients
or would reveal proprietary information about the ADP business model.

Page 5 of 75

1

Introduction

It is well-known that aggregate wages exhibit muted cyclicality (Abraham and Haltiwanger,
1995) None of the last six American recessions were accompanied by declines in nominal
average hourly earnings, while even real wages did not fall during the recessions of 2001
and 2009 (Grigsby, 2019). The potential sluggish response of firms’ marginal cost of labor
has important allocative effects in many models. To capture the stickiness observed in
aggregate wages, many macroeconomic models rely on exogenously specified nominal wage
rigidity.1 However, the literature using micro data to document nominal wage adjustment is
somewhat underdeveloped. This stands in stark contrast to the large literature using micro
data to establish key moments of output price adjustment, which have guided theories of
nominal price rigidities.2 As a result, the nature of nominal wage stickiness remains a central
question within the literature. For example, at the 2014 Jackson Hole Symposium, Janet
Yellen speculated that downward nominal wage rigidity was an important reason why wages
neither fell during the Great Recession nor increased faster during the subsequent recovery.
The goal of this paper is to measure the extent of nominal wage rigidity using micro
data from the United States. Doing so is challenging given the complex nature of worker
compensation which includes guaranteed contract earnings as well as commissions, tips,
bonuses, performance pay, and overtime premiums. The purpose of incorporating wage
rigidity into macroeconomic theories is to generate muted cyclicality of firms’ marginal cost
of labor. If different compensation components differ in their cyclical responsiveness, then
so too will their impact on the cyclical response of firms’ marginal costs. Similarly, if new
hire wages are more easily adjusted than those of incumbent workers, then examining the
wage adjustments of job-stayers only will yield an incomplete representation of the degree
of wage flexibility in the economy. Furthermore, in many theories of employment dynamics,
the present value of worker earnings determine labor market fluctuations. Therefore, it is
important to measure the cyclicality and persistence of each component of compensation
separately. The most persistent and cyclical components of compensation will better match
the allocative notion of a wage in models with wage rigidity.
The empirical demands for a complete study of wage rigidity are therefore great, which
is a major reason why the literature measuring nominal wage adjustment in micro data
has remained underdeveloped. Few datasets separately identify the various components
1

See Christiano et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007) for classic references incorporating nominal
wage rigidities into dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models of the aggregate economy. More recently,
see Beraja et al. (2019).
2
See, for example, Bils and Klenow (2004), Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), and Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008) for important contributions.

1

