Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution? Evidence from the
Swiss Income Tax Holidays
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2018-0746.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: H24, H26, E65

Page 1 of 92

Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution?
Evidence from the Swiss Income Tax Holidays
Isabel Z. Martı́nez

Emmanuel Saez

Michael Siegenthaler∗

August 26, 2020
Abstract
This paper estimates intertemporal labor supply responses to two-year long income tax holidays
staggered across Swiss cantons. Cantons shifted from an income tax system based on the
previous two years’ income to a standard annual pay as you earn system, leaving two years of
income untaxed. We find significant but quantitatively very small responses of wage earnings
with an inter-temporal elasticity of .025 overall. High wage income earners and especially the
self-employed display larger responses with elasticities around .1 and .25 respectively, most likely
driven by tax avoidance. We find no effects along the extensive margin at all. (JEL E65, H24,
H26, J22)

∗

Martı́nez: ETH Zurich, KOF Swiss Economic Institute, Leonhardstrasse 21, CH–8092 Zurich,
Switzerland (e-mail: martinez@kof.ethz.ch); Saez: University of California, Department of Economics,
530 Evans Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 (e-mail: saez@econ.berkeley.edu); Siegenthaler: ETH Zurich,
KOF Swiss Economic Institute, Leonhardstrasse 21, CH–8092 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: siegenthaler@kof.ethz.ch). We thank Marius Brülhart, David Card, Raj Chetty, Reto Föllmi, Daniel Hamermesh, Boris Kaiser, Daniel Kaufmann, Henrik Kleven, Daniel Kopp, Camille Landais, Stefan Legge,
Thomas Lemieux, Emi Nakamura, Tobias Renkin, Samad Sarferaz, Benjamin Schoefer, Josef Sigurdsson, Daphné Skandalis, Michael Smart, Ivan Werning, Josef Zweimüller, three anonymous referees, and
numerous conference and seminar participants for helpful discussions and comments. We acknowledge
financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley and NSF grant SES-1559014.
We thank Claudia Berlin and the Swiss Federal Statistical Office for providing census data and for the
support which made the Swiss National Cohort and this study possible. The record linkage was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The members of the Swiss National Cohort Study
Group are Matthias Egger, Adrian Spoerri and Marcel Zwahlen, Milo Puhan, Matthias Bopp, Martin
Röösli, Murielle Bochud and Michel Oris.

Page 2 of 92

The intertemporal labor supply elasticity of substitution—traditionally called the
Frisch elasticity—measures how much more people are willing to work when their wage
increases temporarily. This elasticity plays a key role in amplifying the effects of technological shocks on labor supply and economic activity in calibrated macro real business
cycle models. The intuition is the following. Suppose there is a temporary negative
technological shock which reduces productivity (relative to trend). This shock reduces
wages temporarily. If the Frisch elasticity is large, relatively modest technological shocks
can translate into large labor supply responses and hence explain why downturns are
accompanied by large falls in employment. Indeed, most calibrated macro real business
cycle models require a very large Frisch elasticity in excess of one to generate realistic
quantitative predictions (see e.g., King and Rebelo, 1999).
However, identifying the Frisch elasticity is empirically challenging as it requires exogenous time variation in net wage rates unrelated to labor supply or human capital
accumulation decisions. As a result, recent studies have often used specific occupations—
such as taxi drivers—where exogenous variation in wages is more plausible (see Reichling
and Whalen, 2012; Chetty et al., 2013, for surveys and discussions). Using tax variation has long been a traditional source of exogenous variation to estimate static labor
supply elasticities (see e.g., Keane, 2011, for a survey). However, tax variation typically
does not provide temporary variation needed to estimate the Frisch elasticity.1 In this
paper, we break new ground on this important issue by exploiting an unusual tax policy
reform in Switzerland that generated large, salient, and well-advertised one- or two-year
long income tax holidays staggered across the 26 Swiss cantons, which are the member
states of the Swiss Confederation. The tax holiday, which exempts earnings from income
taxation temporarily for everybody in the local economy (the cantonal level), is close to
being the ideal experiment to estimate the Frisch elasticity. This has three additional
advantages relative to previous work. First, our estimates are representative of the total
population and do not focus on very specific—and potentially more elastic—occupations
(such as taxi drivers). Second, we can identify the Frisch on an annual frequency, which
is the relevant time frame for business cycle analyses (occupation-specific studies use
much higher—often daily—frequencies). Third, while various frictions, such as jobs with
fixed hours or high fixed costs of starting to work, may dampen the response relative to
the standard frictionless model of labor supply, such frictions are also present when the
economy responds to a temporary technology shock. Therefore, the “frictional Frisch”
elasticity we estimate is also the relevant reduced form parameter to evaluate the role of
1

Important exceptions are Bianchi et al. (2001); Sigurdsson (2018); Stefansson (2019) who use a one
year income tax holiday in Iceland. We discuss the link between these studies and ours in detail below.

1

Page 3 of 92

intertemporal labor supply in macro business cycle modeling.2
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Switzerland switched from an income tax system
where current taxes were based on the previous two years’ income to a standard annual
pay as you earn system. For example, in the old system, income taxes due in years 1997
and 1998 were both based on the average income over the two preceding years 1995 and
1996. This system of owing taxes based on prior year incomes was common in income tax
systems before pay as you earn tax systems were put in place.3 In the new system, taxes
on income earned in year t are collected during year t with a tax return filed in year t + 1
and an adjustment made through a tax refund or an extra tax payment if taxes already
collected are not exactly equal to taxes owed.4 This is the system used in all advanced
economies today.
Swiss cantons transitioned in three waves in 1999, 2001, and 2003. Two cantons transitioned early in 1999, most cantons transitioned in 2001, and three cantons transitioned
late in 2003. The transition happened for federal, cantonal, and municipal income taxes
simultaneously in each canton. To illustrate the mechanism, take the example of the
canton of Thurgau as depicted on Figure 1.A, which transitioned in 1999. In 1997 and
1998, income taxes (at the federal, cantonal, and municipal levels) were paid based on the
average of 1995 and 1996 incomes. In 1999, income taxes (at the federal, cantonal, and
municipal levels) were based solely on 1999 incomes. In 2000, income taxes were based
solely on 2000 incomes, etc. To avoid double payment of taxes in 1999 and 2000, no tax
was ever assessed on 1997 and 1998 incomes (which would have been paid in 1999 and
2000 under the old system). Therefore, this transition created a two-year long income
tax holiday for incomes earned in years 1997 and 1998. Hence, cantons transitioning
in 1999 had a tax holiday for years 1997–1998; cantons transitioning in 2001 had a tax
holiday for years 1999–2000; and cantons transitioning in 2003 had a tax holiday for years
2001-2002. An extra source of variation comes from the fact that some cantons used an
annual system of assessment (instead of biennial) for the cantonal and municipal taxes.
For these cantons, the transition generates only a one-year long tax holiday for local
taxes.5
2

Naturally, estimating separately the pure frictionless Frisch elasticity from the dampening effects of
frictions could also be useful for other applications (see e.g., Chetty et al., 2013).
3
The US transitioned in 1943, the UK transitioned in 1944. France, the last holdout, just transitioned
in 2019. The Swiss system was further particular in that it used an average of two years to compute
base income (instead of using a standard annual income base).
4
In both the old and the new system, Switzerland does not use withholding at source and individuals
are typically required to pay estimated taxes in quarterly installments (as is done in the US for income
not subject to tax withholding such as self-employment income).
5
Take the example of Zurich which transitioned in 1999. In 1998, local taxes were based on 1997
incomes. In 1999, local taxes were based on 1999 incomes, so that the tax holiday for local taxes was just
for 1998. Local income taxes (defined as cantonal plus municipal) make up over 80 percent of income

2

Page 4 of 92

The tax holiday increased the net of tax rate (defined as one minus the marginal tax
rate) by about 25–30 percent on average. Hence for example, with a Frisch elasticity
of one, which is toward the low end of estimates used in macro-calibrations, we should
expect a 25–30 percent increase in earnings. The tax holiday timing was discussed at
length in the press well before the transition took place, making it salient to the public,
particularly for the last 2 waves of transitioning cantons. Various press articles discussed
how working and earning more during the tax holiday (relative to later years) was fiscally
advantageous.
To carry out our study, we use population-wide social security longitudinal earnings
records from 1990 to 2010 matched to decennial Census data. These data allow us to
obtain precise estimates exploiting fine geographical variation. Our strategy relies on a
simple difference-in-differences method where we compare earnings outcomes over time
and across localities that transitioned at different times. Because we have large data,
we obtain smooth and precise time series for a number of earnings outcomes even when
restricting the data to specific earnings or demographic groups. We find that series for
different cantons move in a very similar way over time pre- and post-reform giving us
confidence that the parallel trend identification assumption holds. The graphical time
series evidence shows clearly that bumps in earnings arise during the tax holidays for
some sub-groups, and can then be confidently interpreted as the causal effect of the tax
holiday. We supplement the time series analysis by a longitudinal regression based microlevel approach to tease out tax holiday effects on earnings systematically. Our analysis is
limited to labor income because we do not have data on capital income (as the cantonal
tax administrations did not systematically collect data on incomes earned during the tax
holidays). Our main analysis focuses on prime age individuals aged 20 to 60.6
We obtain five main results. First, we do not find any evidence of a response along
the employment margin (extensive margin). This implies that the Frisch elasticity is
very small along the extensive margin. Second, there is a small aggregate response of
wage earnings with an implied Frisch elasticity of .025 for aggregate wage earnings. The
responses are larger higher up in the wage earnings distribution, with Frisch elasticities
of .1 for the highest-earners. We do not find responses along the hours of work margin.
Third, there is a larger response of self-employment earnings that is present at different
earnings levels (and not just the top). Overall, the Frisch elasticity for self-employment
earnings is around .2. Fourth, effects are actually larger for men than for women, in
contrast to the standard findings in the labor supply literature. The exception is married
taxes in Switzerland in aggregate.
6
For the elderly, tax incentives interact with retirement decisions and the incentives created by the
retirement system.

3

Page 5 of 92

couples with children, where the elasticities are similar. Fifth, most of these responses are
concentrated in the last wave of transitioning cantons with tax holidays in 2001–2002.
Responses for earlier transitions such as 1997–1998 or 1999–2000 appear to be more
muted. This latter effect might be due to learning as it might take time for the public
to understand tax holidays and how to respond to them. Overall, our evidence suggests
that responses are driven primarily by tax avoidance rather than real labor supply. As a
result, our paper shows that the Frisch real labor supply channel due to labor market-wide
temporary changes in net-wage-rates is quantitatively very modest and particularly so
along the extensive employment margin. This casts doubt on quantitative calibrations of
macro models that use very large Frisch elasticities to account for the large employment
fluctuations over the business cycle.
Closest to our study, Bianchi et al. (2001), Sigurdsson (2018), and Stefansson (2019)
exploit the one-year tax holiday in Iceland produced by a transition from an income tax
based on prior year income to a pay as you earn income tax in 1987. Using a small
survey dataset, Bianchi et al. (2001) report large effects with an implied Frisch elasticity
of .42 along the extensive margin. But it is difficult to disentangle the tax effects from
the business cycle effect in this study as the tax holiday corresponded to the peak year
of the business cycle in Iceland (see their Figures 1 and 2, p. 1565). Sigurdsson (2018)
builds a population wide earnings dataset to study the same reform. Using labor supply
participation patterns by age, he finds a much smaller extensive-margin Frisch elasticity
.1. Exploiting variation in tax rates across income groups, he finds an intensive marginal
Frisch elasticity of .4. Stefansson (2019) using a similar identification strategy, finds a
smaller Frisch intensive elasticity of .07 and discusses the sensitivity of estimates with
respect to the exact empirical specification. The key advantage of our analysis is that
tax holidays in Switzerland happen at different times in different cantons.
This paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the reform and the variation we
exploit. Section II describes the data we use. Section III describes our empirical results.
Section IV concludes. The appendix includes more details on the data we use as well as
a number of robustness checks that we only mention briefly in the main text.

I
I.A

The Tax Holiday Reform
The Swiss Income Tax System

Individual income taxes in Switzerland are quantitatively large and represent about 1/3
of total tax revenue or about 9 percent of the Swiss GDP. Income taxes in Switzerland are
residence-based and levied at the federal, cantonal, and municipality level. The federal
4

