Leadership and Social Movements: The Forty-Eighters in the
Civil War
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1137.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: N41, J61, D72

Page 1 of 93

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
As per the principles laid out in the AER’s disclosure policy
at https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/disclosure-policy

Manuscript: AER-XXXX- “Leadership and Social Movements: The Forty-Eighters in the Civil War”

Author: Christian Dippel

I have not received any grant money or other money from any institution that could be classified as
‘interested’ in relation to this manuscript.
I hold no positions at any ‘relevant’ organization.

SIGNED:

DATE: July 20th 2020

Page 2 of 93

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
As per the principles laid out in the AER’s disclosure policy
at https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/disclosure-policy

Manuscript: AER-XXXX- “Leadership and Social Movements: The Forty-Eighters in the Civil War”

Author: Stephan Heblich

I have not received any grant money or other money from any institution that could be classified as
‘interested’ in relation to this manuscript.
I hold no positions at any ‘relevant’ organization.

SIGNED:

DATE: July 20th 2020

Page 3 of 93

Leadership in Social Movements:
Evidence from the Forty-Eighters in the Civil War
By

Christian Dippel and Stephan Heblich*

This paper studies the role of leaders in the social movement
against slavery that culminated in the U.S. Civil War. Our analysis is organized around a natural experiment: leaders of the failed
German revolution of 1848–49 were expelled to the U.S. and became anti-slavery campaigners who helped mobilize Union Army
volunteers. Towns where Forty-Eighters settled show two-thirds
higher Union Army enlistments. Their influence worked through
local newspapers and social clubs. Going beyond enlistment decisions, Forty-Eighters reduced their companies’ desertion rate during the war. In the long run, Forty-Eighter towns were more likely
to form a local chapter of the NAACP.
JEL: N41, J15, J61, D72
Keywords: Civil War, Abolition, Leadership, Social Movements,
Immigration, Forty-Eighters

* Dippel: University of California, Los Angeles, Anderson School of Management, CCPR,
and NBER, 110 Westwood Plaza, Entrepreneurs Hall C5.12, Los Angeles, CA 90095, christian.dippel@anderson.ucla.edu. Heblich: University of Toronto, Munk School of Global Affairs & Public
Policy and Department of Economics, CEP, CESifo, ifw Kiel, IZA, 1 Devonshire Place, Toronto, ON,
M5S 3K7, Canada, stephan.heblich@utoronto.ca. We would like to thank the editor, two referees, Daron
Acemoglu, Toman Barsbai, Sascha Becker, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Dora Costa, James Feigenbaum, Raquel
Fernandez, Paola Giuliano, Walter Kamphoefner, Michael Haines, Saumitra Jha, Matthew Kahn, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Gary Libecap, Zach Sauers, Jakob Schneebacher, Elisabeth Perlman, Nico Voigtländer, John
Wallis, Romain Wacziarg, Nikolaus Wolf, Gavin Wright, Guo Xu, Yanos Zylberberg and conference and
seminar participants at UCLA, U Calgary, Bristol, HU Berlin the NBER DAE and POL meetings, the
EHA meetings, and the UCI IMBS for helpful comments. We thank David Cruse, Andrew Dale, Karene
Daniel, Andrea di Miceli, Jake Kantor, Zach Lewis, Josh Mimura, Rose Niermeijer, Sebastian Ottinger,
Anton Sobolev, Gwyneth Teo, and Alper Yesek for excellent research assistance. We would like to thank
Michael Haines for sharing data. We would thank Yannick Dupraz and Andreas Ferrara for data-sharing
and joint efforts in collecting the Civil War soldier and regiments data. We would thank John Wallis
and Jeremy Darrington for helpful advice in locating sub-county voting data for the period (although
it ultimately did not lead anywhere). Dippel acknowledges financial support for this project from the
UCLA Center of Global Management, the UCLA Price Center and the UCLA Burkle Center.

1

Page 4 of 93

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

Between 1861 and 1865, the United States’ North and South fought each other
over the issue of slavery in the American Civil War. One in five adult men—2.2
million in the North alone—took up arms to fight in the Union Army. Fighting
was costly on both sides: In total, 620,000 men lost their lives, as many as in all
other American wars combined (Hacker, 2011; Costa and Kahn, 2003). At the
same time, the financial incentives to fight in the war were low. Union Army
privates earned about $13 per month—less than a farmhand (Edmunds, 1866,
512)—and payment was irregular. In the South, there were stronger economic
motives at least for some, since the war was about the survival of Southern institutions and property (Hall, Huff and Kuriwaki, 2019). Yet, almost 95 percent of
Northern soldiers were volunteers. What, then, drove men to risk their lives in
the fight against slavery and Southern secession, despite high personal costs and
low economic compensation?
In this paper, we study the role that individual leaders played in determining
local enlistment decisions at this critical juncture. We focus on the Forty-Eighters,
leaders in the German revolutions of 1848–49 who were subsequently expelled to
America for their activities. By historical serendipity, the egalitarian and prorepublican convictions that got the Forty-Eighters expelled from Europe in 1849
mapped closely into the political struggles that would come to a head in the U.S. a
decade later.1 During the first few years after their arrival in the U.S., the FortyEighters’ political convictions lay dormant as their lives were dominated by the
practical necessities of earning a livelihood in their new home. This changed when
the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 blew the lid off the sectional political conflict
around slavery (Foner, 1970).2 This lead the Forty-Eighters to “revive the spirit
of the failed struggle for liberty in the fight against slavery” (Baron, 2012, 3). By
the time this conflict culminated in the Civil War, the Forty-Eighters had become
influential campaigners against slavery, and mobilizers of Union Army volunteers
(Zucker 1950, Wittke 1973, Levine 1980, 256, Kamphoefner and Helbich 2006,
38, Goodheart 2011, 257).
To quantify the Forty-Eighters’ mobilization effect and shed light on underlying mechanisms that helped them spread the ‘liberal contagion’, we combine
several newly created datasets at the town-level. First, we compile a list of almost 500 Forty-Eighters from historical sources and complete their U.S. biographies through individual searches in genealogical online sources. This tells us
the towns where the Forty-Eighters settled and spread their liberal ideas. Secondly, we geo-located the town-level extracts from the 1850 and 1860 censuses
and merged them with our Forty-Eighters database to create a dataset of U.S
1 In the words of their foremost historian, “three aspects dominated the scene from which [the FortyEighters] fled into the freedom of the United States: liberty, democracy, and national unity” (Zucker,
1950, p.9).
2 This act ended the second American party system in which the Democratic and the Whig Party
were the main opponents. By the 1856 presidential election, the Whigs had disappeared and the election
was decided between the Democrats and two parties that had not yet existed in 1852, one of them the
anti-slavery Republican Party.

Page 5 of 93

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

LEADERSHIP IN SOCIAL MOVEMENTS

3

towns in 1860. Thirdly, we use the full universe of over 2 million men in the
Union Army rosters to construct a town-level database of local enlistment.
The main empirical concern in estimating the Forty-Eighters’ effect on individual enlistment decisions is spatial sorting. If the Forty-Eighters had settled in
areas where anti-slavery and pro-republican convictions were independently becoming stronger, we would overestimate their effect. We address this concern in
two ways. First, we select from the large number of untreated towns a matched
sample of control towns that are closest to being ‘statistical twins’ of the treated
towns. This reduces selection effects; and the more balanced covariate distribution reduces noise and renders the outcome less sensitive to small changes in the
model specification (Imbens and Rubin, 2015). Our matching is informed by a
variable selection model that reveals factors that influenced the Forty-Eighters’
choice of where to settle, i.e. they were more likely to co-locate with other recent
German immigrants in the Mid-West and choose less rural locations. Once we
condition on these location factors, we end up with a well-balanced sample of
treatment and control locations.3
While matching aids identification, it alone does not establish causality. To
overcome remaining concerns about unobserved drivers of the Forty-Eighters’ location choice, we suggest an instrumental variable (IV) strategy based on random
social ties that the Forty-Eighters formed on their ten-week transatlantic voyage
to America. Idiosyncratic connections made on the voyage were particularly influential for the Forty-Eighters because of the haphazard nature of their departure
from Europe: they mostly traveled alone (as we observe in ship-list data), they
had little time to plan ahead, and they lacked family ties in the United States,
meaning they usually embarked on their voyage with no planned destination in
America.4 Using the universe of German immigrant ship-lists from the ’Germans
to America’ collection, we link 152 Forty-Eighters to 136 ships, and instrument
the Forty-Eighters location choice with the distribution of their co-passengers’ intended destinations in the U.S., which were recorded at the immigration lines in
the port of entry.5 We condition our IV estimates on the distribution of reported
destinations of passengers on more than 1,700 other German immigrant ships
that arrived in the same 1848–1852 time-window. In this way, we disentangle the
idiosyncratic component of what the Forty-Eighters’ co-passengers knew about
U.S. destinations.
Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates on the matched sample suggest that
having one or more Forty-Eighter in a town raised Union Army enlistments by
two thirds, or eight extra enlistees per 100 adult men. By contrast, the estimated
3 This approach omits all larger treated towns, e.g. Philadelphia or Cincinnati, because they have
no statistical twin in the same state, generating a matched sample of 55 treated towns and around 200
control towns.
4 Battiston (2018) shows that even on the much briefer two-week steam-ship transatlantic crossings
in the 20th century, social ties formed with co-passengers had a significant impact on immigrants’ future
path in the U.S.
5 Very few Forty-Eighter reported a planned destination themselves and we omit these cases.

