Enforcing Wealth Taxes in the Developing World: QuasiExperimental Evidence from Colombia
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0319.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
26-Sep-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Londono-Velez, Juliana; NBER,
Avila-Mahecha, Javier; Direccion de Impuestos y Aduanas Nacionales
Keywords: D31, H26, O23

Page 1 of 46

Enforcing Wealth Taxes in the Developing World:
Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Colombia
By Juliana Londoño-Vélez and Javier Ávila-Mahecha∗
This paper investigates the feasibility of wealth taxation in
developing countries. It uses rich administrative data from
Colombia and leverages a government-designed program for
voluntary disclosures of hidden wealth, as well as the threat
of detection triggered by the Panama Papers leak. There are
two key findings. First, there is substantial (primarily offshore)
evasion: two-fifths of the wealthiest 0.01% evade taxes, with these
evaders concealing one-third of their wealth offshore. Second,
strengthening enforcement can have a significant impact on wealth
tax compliance, tax revenue, and progressivity. These results
highlight both challenges and opportunities for wealth taxation in
the developing world.
JEL: D31, H26, O2
Concerns about rising wealth inequality have spurred a renewed interest in
progressive wealth taxation. While experts have debated the extent to which
wealth taxes could be enforced in rich countries like the United States (Saez and
Zucman, 2019a,b), the discussion regarding developing countries has been muted.
On the one hand, developing countries are often afflicted by acute income and
wealth inequality (Alvaredo et al., eds, 2018), and could thus benefit from levying
more progressive taxes. On the other hand, the weak tax enforcement capacity
that characterizes these settings (Pomeranz, 2015; Slemrod, 2019)—compounded
by a particular vulnerability towards tax havens (Alstadsater et al., 2018b)—could
lead some to conclude that taxing wealth is simply not feasible in the developing
world.
This paper aims to fill this gap by providing quasi-experimental evidence from
∗ Juliana Londoño-Vélez, UCLA, Department of Economics, Bunche Hall 8283, 315 Portola
Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, j.londonovelez@econ.ucla.edu. Javier Ávila-Mahecha: Dirección de
Impuestos y Aduanas Nacionales (DIAN), Carrera 8 # 6C-38, Edificio San Agustı́n, Bogotá, Colombia,
javilam@dian.gov.co. We thank Amy Finkelstein, Rohini Pande, and the anonymous referees for valuable
guidance. We are grateful to Emmanuel Saez, Edward A. Miguel, and Gabriel Zucman for their support
and encouragement. We have benefited from comments and suggestions from Alan Auerbach, Anne
Brockmeyer, Youssef Benzarti, Raj Chetty, Alessandra Fenizia, Leopoldo Fergusson, Daniel Haanwinckel,
Nathaniel Hendren, Hilary Hoynes, Lawrence Katz, Henrik Kleven, Patrick Kline, Evan P. Kresch,
Nicholas Y. Li, Giulia Mascagni, Juan Ricardo Ortega, Ricardo Pérez-Truglia, Jim Poterba, Evan K.
Rose, Kurt Schmidheiny, David Seim, Yotam Shem-Tov, Stefanie Stantcheva, Juan Carlos Suárez-Serrato,
Darı́o Tortarolo, Christopher Walters, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and numerous seminar participants.
We are grateful to Santiago Rojas for his support throughout this project. We thank Carlos Chaparro
for his help in understanding the Colombian tax code. Juliana gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the Burch Center for Tax Policy, and the Center for
Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
do not necessarily reflect the views of DIAN.

1

Page 2 of 46

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

Colombia. We use administrative tax microdata on income and wealth merged
with the leaked “Panama Papers,” which shed light on offshoring to Colombia’s
most relevant tax havens. The paper makes two main contributions. First,
we quantify and characterize wealth tax evasion and show how it varies across
the wealth distribution, leveraging a government-designed program for voluntary
disclosures of hidden wealth that took place between 2015 and 2017. Second,
we explore how wealth tax evasion responds to policies aiming to strengthen
enforcement. The canonical Allingham and Sandmo (1972) framework for tax
evasion models the decision of whether and how much to evade as a function of
(i) the tax incentives, (ii) the perceived threat of detection, and (iii) the penalty
for misreporting. Guided by this framework, we exploit a series of exogenouslytimed events to isolate effects along each of these components on tax compliance.
In the first part of the paper, we estimate the prevalence, distribution, and
nature of wealth tax evasion. Colombia’s disclosure program revealed hidden
wealth worth 1.73% of GDP, which is an order of magnitude larger than what
a similar U.S. scheme recovered (Johannesen et al., 2020). There is substantial
evasion: two-fifths of the wealthiest 0.01% of Colombians admit to hiding wealth—
threefold the equivalent share of Scandinavians acknowledging noncompliance in
Alstadsater et al. (2019). Wealth tax evasion is remarkably skewed: the wealthiest
0.01% of the distribution is 55 times more likely to evade than the top 5% as a
whole. This result is not driven by self-selection into disclosing; reassuringly, the
wealth gradient of acknowledging noncompliance parallels that of the (exogenous)
likelihood of being caught offshoring using random leak data. Offshore tax evasion
accounts for over four-fifths of exposed wealth tax evasion, with a third of the
wealthiest evaders’ fortune being concealed offshore.
In the second part of the paper, we examine how tax evasion responds to
sequential changes in the enforcement environment; namely, in the tax incentives,
the perceived detection probability, and the sanctions for misreporting. First,
we estimate the effects of generous tax breaks for disclosing hidden wealth on
both wealth and income tax compliance over time. We use a difference-indifferences approach that compares wealthy individuals—i.e., wealth tax filers—
who disclosed versus never disclosed under the scheme. We find that tax compliance
is persistent: three years after their revelation, disclosers report 49.2% more
wealth and, by virtue of disclosing the return of those assets, also pay 39% more
income taxes—a magnitude similar to what Alstadsater et al. (2018a) find in
Norway. Given that exposed wealth tax evasion is highly concentrated at the
top, the policy raised revenue collected from the wealthiest 1%, raising effective
progressivity.
Second, we find that evasion responds to the credible threat of detection.
Halfway through the disclosure scheme, the Panama Papers news story broke,
exposing tax evaders named in the leak to government scrutiny. Exploiting the
exogenous timing of this leak, we compare wealth tax filers who appear named
(treated) or not (control) in the leak before and after it occurred. The difference-

Page 3 of 46

VOL.

NO.

ENFORCING WEALTH TAXES IN COLOMBIA

3

in-differences estimator shows that the threat of detection caused by the leak
induced a 27 percentage point increase in the likelihood of disclosing, i.e., a
sixfold increase relative to the pre-leak treated mean. Consistent with a drop
in offshore tax evasion, disclosures of foreign assets increased by 29.6 percentage
points. Consequently, taxes paid by those named in the leak more than doubled.
However, since the overwhelming majority of disclosers were not named in the
leak, the Panama Papers account for only a small fraction of all disclosures made
by delinquent taxpayers under Colombia’s scheme.
Lastly, we present suggestive evidence that evasion responds to tougher sanctions.
We observe a large spike in disclosures made six months after Colombia criminalized
tax evasion for the first time in its history, just before the disclosure window
expired. Unfortunately, however, we cannot attribute this willingness to come
forward solely to tougher sanctions, as other factors (like procrastination) might
have played a role as well.
Our empirical findings help reconcile the views of the wealth tax skeptics
(Summers and Sarin, 2019a,b) and enthusiasts (Saez and Zucman, 2019a) regarding
the feasibility of taxing wealth in a globalized world. On the one hand, we
show that offshore evasion is an important threat to progressive wealth taxation,
especially when the enforcement environment—as in most of the developing world—
is weak. On the other hand, strengthening the enforcement regime has significant
impacts on wealth tax compliance and raises revenue collected from the wealthiest
individuals. Improving enforcement may, therefore, safeguard the feasibility of
progressive wealth taxation, even in settings characterized by high levels of inequality
and low baseline tax compliance.
We contribute to three strands of literature. First, we complement the growing
literature on tax evasion and enforcement in the developing world (e.g., Bachas
and Soto, 2018; Carrillo et al., 2017; Naritomi, 2019; Pomeranz, 2015) by focusing
on high net worth individuals. Second, we complement empirical studies on wealth
taxation in Europe (Brulhart et al., 2019; Durán-Cabé et al., 2019; Jakobsen et
al., 2020; Ring, 2019; Seim, 2017), which do not take into account the threat of
offshore evasion, partly due to measurement barriers. Lastly, we contribute to the
literature evaluating the effectiveness of the recent global wave of crackdowns on
tax havens, including enhanced cross-border tax information exchange agreements
(TIEAs) and voluntary disclosure schemes (Alstadsater et al., 2018a; Bayer et al.,
2015; Johannesen and Zucman, 2014; Johannesen et al., 2020; Langenmayr, 2017).
In particular, we extend Alstadsater et al. (2019) by showing how compliance
responds to the detection threat triggered by whistleblowing on offshoring to the
most relevant tax havens. In addition, we shed light on the distributional impact
of enforcement in a developing country, where tax evasion by the elite can have
devastating effects on vital public goods provision and inhibit development.

Page 4 of 46

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

I.

Context

Colombia has a wealth tax. As a result, the country maintains administrative
data on wealth, enabling us to study evasion at the top of the distribution. To
crack down on wealth tax evasion, Colombia undertook a series of enforcement
initiatives between 2015 and 2017 that shifted taxpayers’ incentives to become
tax compliant. First, it required individuals to report foreign assets in a separate
information return. Second, Colombia implemented a voluntary disclosure program
that, like at least 47 other countries (OECD, 2015), awarded tax breaks for
delinquent taxpayers choosing to come forward. Third, the government contacted
taxpayers identified in the Panama Papers leak to request documentation of their
offshore activities and signed a TIEA with Panama. Lastly, wealth tax evasion
was criminalized so that, if convicted, evaders faced up to nine years in prison.
In what follows we briefly describe the Colombian wealth tax and these changes
in enforcement.
Colombia taxes capital income, realized capital gains, and wealth transfers
(e.g., inter-vivos gifts, inheritances). It also levies a personal wealth tax on
worldwide wealth. Eligibility for the wealth tax is determined by the end-of-year
wealth (total assets minus liabilities) that taxpayers report in their income tax
statements. For instance, taxpayers who reported to own 1 billion pesos or more in
2014 (PPP USD 838,419 or the top 0.2% of adults) paid the wealth tax between
2015 and 2018, with annual tax rates ranging from 0.125% to 1.5%. To avoid
the wealth tax, Colombian taxpayers can, inter alia, underreport less verifiable
assets, artificially inflate debts, and hide wealth in tax havens. Compounding
Colombians’ incentives to conceal fortunes abroad are the violence and insecurity
of the 1980s to early 2000s, which prompted elites to offshore to avert targeting
and expropriation by illegal armed groups.
In December 2014, Colombia established a series of wealth tax enforcement
measures (Law 1739/2014). As depicted in Figure A.1, these new measures were
introduced at a time when significant advances were being made in terms of crossborder TIEAs (OECD, 2015). First, all individuals who own any foreign asset by
January 1 were required to annually report the value of the foreign assets, and
their location, in a separate information return. Those who own foreign assets
worth more than 2015 101 million pesos (PPP USD 84,000) report disaggregated
information for each foreign asset.
Second, Colombia implemented a voluntary wealth disclosure program, the
country’s first comprehensive effort to encourage evaders to regularize their tax
affairs by disclosing hidden wealth.1 Delinquent taxpayers could voluntarily
1 In 2003, taxpayers voluntarily disclosing hidden assets and/or fake debt were subject to harsher
tax treatment (Article 6, Law 863/2003, ruled constitutional by Sentencia C-910/04 ). Subsequent
attempts to encourage such disclosures in 2012 and 2013 (e.g., Article 163, Law 1607/2012) were ruled
unconstitutional on the grounds that evaders would receive overly generous tax benefits (Sentencia C833/13 ). Instead, the penalty charged by the 2015–17 disclosure program (Article 35, Law 1739/2014)
was considered sufficiently sizable; the program was ruled constitutional on August 26, 2015 (Sentencia
C-551/15 ).

Page 5 of 46

VOL.

NO.

ENFORCING WEALTH TAXES IN COLOMBIA

5

disclose an unreported (or underreported) asset or an inexistent debt in separate
boxes in the wealth tax return, filed in May 2015, May 2016, and May 2017. A
key feature of Colombia’s program was that, in exchange for paying a penalty
of 10% of the value of the disclosed wealth, disclosers waived all evaded income
and wealth taxes from past years. To encourage early participation, the penalty
was set to increase from 10% to 11.5% and 13% for disclosures made in 2016 and
2017, respectively. Disclosers also paid wealth taxes upon disclosure and could
face higher income taxes in the following years. If caught misreporting after the
disclosure window expired, evaders would face higher sanctions (initially 200% of
owed taxes, but later also prison sanctions, as we detail below).
On April 3, 2016—one month before the second wealth tax filing season—the
Panama Papers news story broke and the names of Mossack Fonseca’s clients were
thrust into the public spotlight. The leak drew media coverage and public interest
in the matter, as the leak featured prominent politicians, members of congress,
businessmen, lawyers, and journalists.2 Critically, Panama had historically been
Colombia’s most relevant tax haven. Its geographic proximity, the convenience of
Spanish as the official language, and its political stability made Panama Colombians’
most preferred destination to park wealth offshore after the U.S.
Even before the leak, Colombians were more than ten times as likely to own
assets in Panama than in other havens like the Virgin Islands or Switzerland.
The Panama Papers, therefore, capture a highly relevant part of offshoring by
Colombians.
The Colombian tax authority reacted to the Panama Papers leak by scrutinizing
Mossack Fonseca and its clients, contacting taxpayers named in the leak, and
requesting documentation of their offshore activities and transactions. Taxpayers
identified in the leak were allowed to participate in the disclosure program.3 Three
weeks after the leak, the governments of Colombia and Panama announced a
TIEA between the two countries, a move the tax haven had resisted for years.
The TIEA involved on-demand and automatic exchanges of information starting
in June 2017 and 2018, respectively.
In December 2016—six months before the final deadline to disclose under the
scheme—Colombia criminalized tax evasion for the first time. Evaders caught
hiding wealth would not only have to pay 20% of the value of the misreported
asset(s) or debt in fines but, if found underreporting assets and/or overreporting
liabilities worth over 5.66 billion pesos (2017 PPP USD 4.36 million), could also
face between 48 and 108 months in prison (Law 1819/2016).
II.

Data

We use microdata from the following four main sources:
2 As an illustration, Figure A.3 plots Colombia’s Google searches for the term “Panama Papers.”
3 The first charges related to the Panama Papers were filed on October 4, 2017. Later that month,
some individuals were placed under house arrest.

