Security Transitions
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0412.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: D72, D74, L23

Page 1 of 82

Disclosure Statement
I, Thiemo Fetzer, declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper: Security Transitions.

Thiemo Fetzer
Date: 18 March, 2020

Page 2 of 82

Disclosure Statement
I, Pedro CL Souza, declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate
to the research in the paper “Security Transitions”

March 18th 2020

Page 3 of 82

Disclosure Statement
I, Oliver Vanden Eynde, declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests
that relate to the research described in the paper: Security Transitions.

Date: 18 March, 2020

Page 4 of 82

Disclosure Statement
I, Austin L. Wright, declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in the paper: Security Transitions.

Austin L. Wright
Date: March 18, 2020

Page 5 of 82

Security Transitions∗
Thiemo Fetzer†

Pedro CL Souza‡
Oliver Vanden Eynde§
Austin L. Wright¶
January 17, 2021

Abstract
How do foreign powers disengage from a conflict? We study this issue by examining the recent, large-scale security transition from international troops to local
forces in the ongoing civil conflict in Afghanistan. We construct a new dataset
that combines information on this transition process with declassified conflict outcomes and previously unreleased quarterly survey data of residents’ perceptions
of local security. Our empirical design leverages the staggered roll-out of the
transition, and employs a novel instrumental variables approach to estimate the
impact. We find a significant, sharp, and timely decline of insurgent violence in
the initial phase – the security transfer to Afghan forces; we find that this is followed by a significant surge in violence in the second phase – the actual physical
withdrawal of foreign troops. We argue that this pattern is consistent with a signaling model, in which the insurgents reduce violence strategically to facilitate the
foreign military withdrawal to capitalize on the reduced foreign military presence
afterwards. Our findings clarify the destabilizing consequences of withdrawal in
one of the costliest conflicts in modern history, and yield potentially actionable
insights for designing future security transitions.
Keywords: Counterinsurgency, Civil Conflict, Public Goods Provision
JEL Classification: D72, D74, L23
∗ We thank Gani Aldashev, Leonardo Arriola, Eli Berman, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Nathan J. Canen, Wioletta Dziuda, James
Fearon, Anthony Fowler, Massimo Morelli, Hannes Mueller, Gerard Padro, Christopher Price, Jacob Shapiro, Mathias Thoenig,
Juan Vargas, Daniel Weggeland (SIGAR) and audiences at the Chicago Harris Political Economy, ESOC Annual Conference,
University of Warwick, IAE Barcelona Workshop on Prediction for Prevention, HiCN conference, CREST Political Economy
Workshop, Labex OSE Aussois Days, Durham University, University of Manchester, Toulouse School of Economics, UZH, APSA,
and NBER. Manh Duc Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. Support from the Pearson Institute for the Study and
Resolution of Conflicts, ANR grant COOPCONFLICT, and EUR grant ANR-17-EURE-0001 is gratefully acknowledged. We thank
Phil Eles, ANQAR technical lead at NATO, for granting access to the platform and providing technical feedback. Any errors
remain our own.
† Department of Economics, University of Warwick. Email: t.fetzer@warwick.ac.uk.
‡ Department of Economics, University of Warwick. Email: pedro.souza@warwick.ac.uk.
§ Paris School of Economics and CNRS. Email: oliver.vanden.eynde@ens.fr.
¶ Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago. Email: austinlw@uchicago.edu.

