Highway to Hitler
Journal: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Manuscript ID AEJApp-2018-0816.R1
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: H54, P16, N44

Page 1 of 73

Authors must acknowledge our Data Availability Policy and state whether or
not they can make their data available to the public if the paper is accepted for
publication. Please consult with your coauthors before answering.
Misrepresentation of the availability of your data may result in reversal of an
acceptance decision.
If my paper is accepted, I will provide all the data and programs used in my
research, allowing them to be posted on the journal's website.

Page 2 of 73

HIGHWAY TO HITLER *
Nico Voigtländer

Hans-Joachim Voth

UCLA, NBER and CEPR

University of Zurich and CEPR

This draft: December 2020

Abstract: Can autocracies win electoral support by showcasing economic competence? We
analyze a famous case – the building of the Autobahn network in Nazi Germany. Using newly
collected data, we show that highway construction was effective in boosting popular support,
helping to entrench the Nazi dictatorship. Direct economic benefits such as declining
unemployment near construction sites are unlikely to explain the increase in pro-Nazi votes.
In addition, Nazi propaganda used the Autobahn as a powerful symbol of successful economic
policy, putting an effective end to austerity – so that many Germans credited the Nazi regime
for the economic recovery. In line with this interpretation, we show that support for the Nazis
increased even more where highway construction coincided with greater radio availability –
a major source of propaganda. The effect of highways was also significantly stronger in
politically unstable states of the Weimar Republic. Our results suggest that infrastructure
spending can raise support for autocracy when voters are led to associate it with visible
economic progress and an end to political instability.

Keywords: political economy, entrenchment of dictatorships, infrastructure spending
JEL Classification: H54, P16, N44, N94

*

For helpful comments, we thank Sascha Becker, Eli Berman, Tim Besley, Leonardo Bursztyn, Davide Cantoni,
Bruno Caprettini, Ernesto Dal Bo, Melissa Dell, Rick Hornbeck, Torsten Persson, James Robinson, Andrei
Shleifer, Jim Snyder, and Noam Yuchtman. Seminar audiences at Basel University, Bonn, CREI, Dartmouth,
Haas-Berkeley, King’s College London, the Juan March Institute, LSE, UC-Berkeley, UC San Diego, Warwick,
Yale, Zurich, and at the Barcelona Summer Forum offered useful suggestions. We are grateful to Hans-Christian
Boy, Vicky Fouka, Cathrin Mohr, Casey Petroff, Colin Spear and Inken Töwe for outstanding research
assistance. Maja Adena, Ruben Enikolopov, and Maria Petrova kindly shared data on radio signal strength in
Nazi Germany.

Page 3 of 73

1

“…while a decade of Weimar parliaments had produced
only talk and sketches, a mere three years of National
Socialism had built a thousand kilometres of traversable
superhighways… Their very existence seemed to verify
the Nazi thesis that the state must be given a free hand,
if it were to restore Germany to her former glory.”
(Shand 1984, p.194).

1

Introduction

In the last 200 years, democracy has spread around the globe. In 1816, less than 1% of world
population lived in democracies. In 2015, the figure stood at 58%. However, progress has not
been a one-way street: Between 1920 and 1938, the number of democratic states in the world
fell from 20 to 13, and the share of the population living in democracies declined from 20.5%
to 14.8%. 1 Nor is democratic fragility necessarily an issue of the past: Ever fewer young
Europeans and U.S. citizens consider it essential to live in a democracy. In the U.S., their
share declined from more than 70% among the 1930s birth cohort to about 30% for the 1980s
cohort. 2
For democracy to fail, autocracy has to triumph. Authoritarian leaders rarely rule by force
alone, and many rely on popular support (Egorov and Sonin 2014). How do authoritarian
rulers convince voters to discard and disregard their democratic rights? The decline of
democracy is often associated with (perceived) social disorder. In these circumstances,
dictatorships may look appealing to the masses because of their capacity to restore order
(Finer 2002; Djankov et al. 2003). As Easterly and Pennings (2016) noted, the view that
economic growth is easier to engineer under strong autocratic regimes has recently gained in
prominence, with China and Singapore often cited as leading examples. 3 Similarly, thirty
percent of US respondents in the 2010 World Value Survey thought that it would be “good or
very good to have a strong leader” that does not have to “bother with parliaments and elections”
(Foa and Mounk 2016). But do shows of efficacy, indeed, buy support for budding dictators?

1 Boix et al. (2012), Vanhanen (2010). Along the same lines, Birdsall and Fukuyama (2011) observe that

“political leaders in the developing world now associate efficiency and capability with autocratic political
systems.”
2 Foa and Mounk (2016). The question asked is whether respondents feel “it is essential to live in a country that
is governed democratically,” where “feeling strongly” corresponds to a rating of 10 on a 10-point scale.
3 See also Friedman (2009). Jones and Olken (2005) show that turnover in the leadership of autocracies leads to
sharp changes in economic performance; Besley and Kudamatsu (2008) model the institutional features of
autocracies that can increase their chances of success.

Page 4 of 73

2

It may instead be true that entrenched dictators are more effective, rather than effective
dictators becoming entrenched.
In this paper, we aim to identify the causal effect of effective policy implementation on
autocratic consolidation. We study a concerted effort showcasing an authoritarian state’s
ability to accomplish ambitious goals: the construction of the Autobahn in Nazi Germany, the
world’s first high-speed road network. Initially, the Nazi grip on power was far from absolute.
In an election that was neither free nor fair in November 1933, many voters opposed the Nazi
regime – in several major cities, more than a quarter of votes were cast against the Nazi Party. 4
By mid-1934, the regime’s popularity was waning amongst the middle class; conservative
elites were dismayed by Nazi lawlessness, and President von Hindenburg threatened military
rule. 5 And yet, by the late 1930s, the Nazi regime had become one of the most popular in
German history – a “consensual dictatorship.” 6 As late as 1955, almost half of all Germans
opined that Hitler would have been “one of the greatest German statesmen had it not been for
the war” (Möbius 2013: 257). 7
A key turning point in the regime’s fortunes came in August 1934, after President von
Hindenburg’s death. Hitler became both chancellor and president, concentrating singular
authority in the hands of the Führer. 8 This increase in power was overwhelmingly endorsed
in a popular referendum. We argue that Autobahn construction contributed markedly to the
regime’s popularity, as reflected in major support for the referendum. 9 Since the last election,
held just 10 months before, road construction had begun in earnest. Opposition against the
regime declined significantly where the new roads were being built. Figure 1 illustrates our
4 Voting results from the Nazi period cannot be taken at face value. Intimidation was massive, and there is some

(limited) evidence of fraud. Nonetheless, we argue that information about popular support can be extracted from
vote shares. Yes votes did not necessarily reflect genuine support – but no-votes were a clear sign of opposition.
No-votes varied importantly over time and space. Even large cities recorded substantial differences: In Aachen
in 1934, for example, 24% voted “no”; in Nuremberg, on the other hand, only 4.6% voted against Hitler
becoming both chancellor and president
5 Time Magazine in July 1934 quoted Adolf Hitler as saying: “Don't forget how people laughed at me 15 years
ago when I declared that one day I would govern Germany. They laugh now, just as foolishly, when I declare
that I shall remain in power!”
6 Aly (2005) and Bajohr (2005).
7 In another survey, some 10% opined that even with the war, Hitler was the greatest German statesman of all
time, whose eminence would only be accepted in the future (Noelle and Neumann 1956: 135).
8 In addition to the referendum, the wholesale murder of the SA-leadership and other prominent anti-Nazis in
the Night of the Long Knives allowed Hitler to consolidate his powers.
9 Saiz (2006) notes a close association between dictatorships and highways, but argues that this is explained by
their use as instruments of repression.

Page 5 of 73

3

main finding. It shows the change in support for the Nazi regime by distance to Autobahn
construction. 10 The Nazis gained more support the closer locations were to highway
construction. Our results suggest persuasion rates of 8-17% due to the Autobahn – a high
value compared with other studies (Della Vigna and Gentzkow 2010). 11
Motorway planning may have followed a political lead after 1933. To deal with potential
endogeneity, we construct least-cost paths between terminal cities connected by highways.
Building costs reflect geological characteristics such as the steepness of the terrain, the
number of rivers to be traversed, etc. We use these least-cost paths as an instrument for actual
construction, excluding the terminal cities themselves from the analysis. Our IV results
confirm the OLS estimates both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance.
What accounts for the Autobahn’s success in winning electoral support for Hitler’s regime?
We argue that highway construction worked because it convinced voters of the Nazi regime’s
“competence,” mainly by seeming to solve Germany’s key economic problem:
unemployment. Between 1933 and 1934, nationwide unemployment fell by half (Humann
2011). However, the roads’ contribution to this success was limited; their construction
employed relatively few workers, and a cyclical upswing had already begun to reduce
unemployment before road-building commenced (Ritschl 1998). Correspondingly, we find
that unemployment fell at a similar rate in cities near highway construction and those further
away. Nevertheless, Goebbels’ propaganda effectively sold the notion that Nazi roadbuilding
was reviving the German economy. 12 Thus, news that the highway was coming was enough
to sway voters: We find that approved highway segments (where people knew construction
would start shortly, but work had not begun) had similar effects on Nazi support as highway
segments already under construction.
We provide further support that propaganda and highway construction complemented each
other – where radio signal strength was high and the new roads were under construction, pro-

10 Since the election in 11/1933 and the referendum in 8/1934 are not directly comparable, we use the difference

in standardized vote shares with mean zero and standard deviation one.
11 Our results reflect local differences in voting; for the country as a whole, effects may well have been larger

because people did not only react to changes at the local level – but also because they saw progress in the country
as a whole.
12 In other words, the Nazi propaganda successfully attributed economic performance to its economic policies –
a process that is generally challenging because of economic volatility (Buera, Monge-Naranjo, and Primiceri
2011).

