The Rising Return to Non-cognitive Skill
Journal: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Manuscript ID AEJApp-2019-0199.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: J24, J31

Page 1 of 58

The Rising Return to Non-cognitive Skill
By Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson, Martin Nybom and Björn
Öckert∗
This paper uses administrative data from Sweden to document
trends in the labor market returns to skills. Between 1992 and
2013, the economic return to non-cognitive skill – a psychologistassessed measure of teamwork and leadership skill – roughly doubled. The return to cognitive skill was relatively stable and decreased modestly during the 2000s, however. Among men with similar levels of education, the return to non-cognitive skill is higher
than the return to cognitive skill. The increasing return to noncognitive skill is driven by changes at the top of the wage distribution and by sorting into higher-paying occupations.
JEL: J24; J31
Keywords: Wage inequality, skill returns, cognitive/non-cognitive
skill, sorting.
According to a recent (and exclusively US) literature, the return to cognitive
skill fell during the 2000s; see Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Beaudry, Green and
Sand (2016) and Castex and Dechter (2014). Concomitantly, the demand for
social skill appear to have moved in the opposite direction. According to Deming
(2017), employment increased more, and wages grew faster, in occupations which
are intensive in social skills.1
We contribute to this literature by providing estimates of the returns to cognitive and non-cognitive skill derived from consistently measured, and nationally
representative, data. We use Swedish enlistment data for the universe of drafted
men, including high-quality information on cognitive and non-cognitive skill. The
draft featured a relatively standard test of cognitive skill (similar to the Armed
Forces Qualification Test). Draftees were also scored on their “non-cognitive”
skill, e.g., their ability to interact with others and their leadership abilities, based
∗ Edin: Department of Economics, Uppsala University, Box 513, SE-75120 Uppsala, UCLS, IFAU, and
STIAS (Email: per-anders.edin@nek.uu.se); Fredriksson: Department of Economics, Uppsala University,
Box 513, SE-75120 Uppsala, UCLS, IZA, and IFAU (Email: peter.fredriksson@nek.uu.se); Nybom: Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy (IFAU), Box 513, SE-75120 Uppsala, UCLS,
and SOFI (Email: martin.nybom@ifau.uu.se); Öckert: IFAU, Box 513, SE-75120 Uppsala, Uppsala University, and UCLS (Email: bjorn.ockert@ifau.uu.se). We thank David Deming, Thomas Lemieux, Anna
Sjögren, Jan Stuhler, and Roope Uusitalo as well as seminar participants at the AASLE (Canberra),
BeNA Workshop (Berlin), Copenhagen University, IIPF (Tokyo) Nordic Summer Institute in Labor Economics (Aarhus), SOFI, Tinbergen Institute, the UCLS workshop on Industrial Relations (Uppsala),
Uppsala University, and the Workshop in Honor of Kjell Salvanes (Bergen) for very helpful comments
and suggestions. We also thank Fredrik Heyman for providing information on automation. Fredriksson
gratefully acknowledges funding from Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg Foundation, Handelsbanken, and
Riksbankens Jubileumsfond.
1 Relatedly, Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2018) argue that the increasing prevalence of women in highwage occupations is due to an increasing importance of social skills in top-end jobs.

1

Page 2 of 58

2

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

on a semi-structured interview with a certified psychologist. By combining the
draft data with annual wage and employment data from administrative registers,
we provide estimates of wage returns to cognitive and non-cognitive skill spanning
more than two decades.2
Our paper is obviously related to the huge literature on skill-biased technical
change (e.g., Tinbergen 1974 and Katz and Murphy 1992) as well as the taskbased approach (e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003 and Acemoglu and Autor
2011). Acemoglu and Autor (2011) show that the 2000s has been distinctively
different in the sense that employment in the US grew much slower at the topend of the wage distribution than during previous decades. A few explanations
for this recent development have been put forward in the literature. Beaudry,
Green and Sand (2016) argue that the slowdown in the demand for cognitive
skill is due to a boom-to-bust cycle caused by the maturation of information
technology (IT). Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014) have a very different take, and
argue that the advances in computing technology rapidly expand the set of tasks
that computers can do; with the advances in computer technology, tasks which
used to be performed by cognitively skilled workers are now becoming “routine”.
Others point out that increasing possibilities for offshoring can have similar effects;
with reductions in trade or coordination costs, the world supply of cognitive skill
can more easily substitute for the internal supply of cognitive skill (see Hummels,
Munch and Xiang 2018).
Our paper is most closely related to Deming (2017), who focuses on the evolution of the return to social skill. As a starting point he notes that skills that
cannot be easily substituted for by technology or trade likely complement these
factors. Social skills are difficult to automate (see also Autor 2015) and production at different sites (generated by offshoring) may require coordination skills.
Deming (2017) sets up a model where social skills facilitate trade in tasks and
examines the implications of this model empirically. He documents an increase in
the return to social skill using the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY),
from 2 percent per standard deviation increase in social skill in NLSY 1979 to
3.7 percent in NLSY 1997.3 Also using the NLSY, Castex and Dechter (2014)
find a substantial decline in the return to cognitive skill between the 1980s and
2000s. Beaudry, Green and Sand (2016) find a similar decline in the demand for
cognitive skill based on occupation data, but without using any direct measures
of skill. While this research provides an important starting point, it also suffers from considerable data limitations. The evidence is based either on indirect
occupation-based skill measures or on survey measurements of skills with some
2 The paper is similar in spirit to Lindqvist and Vestman (2011), who examined the relationship
between employment and earnings, respectively, and skills in a cross-section. Relative to Lindqvist and
Vestman (2011) we take on the time series dimension.
3 In additional analyses, Deming (2017) shows that the increase in the return to social skill is robust
to adding controls for educational attainment and including a measure of “non-cognitive skill” (for NLSY
1979 this is a normalized average of the Rotter score (locus of control) and Rosenberg score (self-esteem)
and for NLSY 1997 he uses two Big 5 questions capturing conscientiousness).

Page 3 of 58

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE RISING RETURN TO NON-COGNITIVE SKILL

3

uncertainty about their comparability over time. For example, the evidence in
Deming (2017) is based on self-reported data about ones personality and sociability, and the survey questions underlying the skill measure change across the
two NLSY surveys.4
We document and compare the year-on-year evolution of the returns to cognitive and non-cognitive skill during the time period 1992-2013. With access to
population-wide data on individual skills, which are comparable over time and
measured before labor-market entry, we provide a more detailed and robust picture than has been possible hitherto. We examine, among other things, whether
the returns to skills changed differentially across the wage distribution, the exact
timing of any changes in the returns to skills, the mediating role of education
for skill returns, and how the changes in the returns to skills are associated with
changes in sorting across occupations and industries. We also explore whether
there are differential effects of offshoring and IT investments on the return to
non-cognitive and cognitive skill, using shift-share analyses.
We establish four main facts. First, we document a strong, secular increase in
the wage return to non-cognitive skill. From 1992 to 2013, the return to noncognitive skill among men in the private sector roughly doubled, from about 7 to
14 percent for a standard deviation increase in skill. Second, there was much less
overall change in the return to cognitive skill. Interestingly, the return to cognitive
skill has fallen since 2000. We demonstrate that these first two facts are robust
to potential trends in measurement error and selection into employment, among
other things.5 Third, the return to non-cognitive skill is higher than the return
to cognitive skill among men with similar educational attainment; again, we see
a doubling of the return to non-cognitive skill over the time period. Fourth, we
find that the increase in the return to non-cognitive skill was substantially larger
at the top-end of the wage distribution.
The first two facts largely match previous evidence from the US. The large
relative increase in the return to non-cognitive skill is similar to Deming (2017).
Nevertheless, the magnitude of the increase is much larger in our data, both in
terms of how the return changes over time and how it compares to the return to
cognitive skill.6 The stagnant, and declining, return to cognitive skill are broadly
in line with the evidence in Castex and Dechter (2014) and Beaudry, Green and
Sand (2016). Our first two facts thus consolidate the US evidence using superior
data.
Our data also enable us to extend the previous literature in various ways. For
example, we study how the returns evolved across the wage distribution. Us4 For NLSY 1979, Deming (2017) uses two measures of self-reported sociability; for NLSY 1997, he
uses two Big 5 questions capturing extraversion.
5 In the online Appendix (Figure A11b) we show that the results are similar when the analysis is
extended to 2017, although moving beyond 2013 is complicated by changes in sample composition.
6 In Sweden the return to non-cognitive skill (14%) was higher than the return to cognitive skill (12%)
in 2013. In the US context, the return to social skill (3.7%) was a quarter of the return to cognitive skill
(15.1%).

Page 4 of 58

4

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

ing quantile regressions, we find that the return to non-cognitive skill increased
from 10 to 19 percent at the 90th percentile, while at 10th percentile the return
grew from 5 to 8 percent. Conversely, while the return to cognitive skill grew
moderately at the 50th and 10th percentiles, the fall in the average return to
cognitive skill is driven by the evolution at the 90th percentile. Taken together,
non-cognitive skill has become relatively more important for wages at the top of
the distribution.
In addition to our four main facts, we present a set of auxiliary analyses that
may help us understand the large changes in skill returns. For example, about
half of the increase in the return to non-cognitive skill takes place across occupations; the occupational component accounts for more of the increase than firms or
industries. Across occupations, there is positive correlation between the change
in the relative return to non-cognitive skill (compared to cognitive skill) and the
intensity of non-cognitive skill usage. This is suggestive evidence of sorting on
returns and that the changes in returns came mainly from the demand side. Finally, a shift-share analysis suggests that offshoring may drive part of the increase
in the relative return to non-cognitive skill and non–cognitive skill use, across industries and occupations. To our knowledge, several of these findings are new to
the literature.
The paper unfolds as follows. Section I describes the data. Section II documents our four main empirical facts, including the large increase in the return
to non-cognitive skill. Section III investigates skill sorting across occupations,
occupational skill returns, and examines whether offshoring and IT-investments
increase the the demand non-cognitive skill. Section IV concludes.
I.

Data

Our primary data sources are administrative wage registers collected by Statistics Sweden and test scores from the Swedish War Archives. The complete wage
data contain information on (full-time equivalent) wages for a very large sample
of establishments covering almost 50 percent of all private sector workers and all
public sector workers during 1985-2017 (Statistics Sweden 2017b).7
To these wage data we add military enlistment test scores, collected when the
individuals were age 18 or 19 (Swedish National Archives 2005). For males who
were born between 1951 and 1975, complete enlistment scores are available for
88-96 percent of each birth cohort.8
Linked to the data there is also information on educational attainment, annual
7 Wage and occupation information is collected during a measurement week (in September-November)
each year, conditional on being employed for at least one hour during the sampling week. Sampling is
stratified by firm size and industry; small firms in the private sector are underrepresented. We do not
use the sampling weights in the regressions; note that the essence of the results does not change with
weighting – see online Appendix Section A3.8. The wage measure includes all wage components, such
as regular pay, piece-rates, performance pay, and fringe benefits; overtime pay is not included, however.
Full-time equivalent wages are constructed from information on monthly pay and contracted hours.
8 Online Appendix Figure A5 shows the fraction of men covered by the draft data over time.

Page 5 of 58

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE RISING RETURN TO NON-COGNITIVE SKILL

5

earnings, employment, occupation, and plants (Statistics Sweden 2017e; Statistics Sweden 2017a; Statistics Sweden 1990; Statistics Sweden 2017d; Statistics
Sweden 2017c). We make frequent use of the occupational information (available
from 1994 and onwards), as well as the task content of different occupations from
O*NET (The Occupational Information Network 2020);9 some of our analyses
also tap information on education, industry, sector, and firm. Adminstrative tax
records provide information on annual earnings; the data also contain an employment indicator constructed by Statistics Sweden on the basis of the earnings
data.
Since we are interested in structural change in the labor market, we focus the
analysis on prime-aged individuals; this group of workers is insulated from the
cyclical variation that affects younger as well as older workers. Our main analysis
is based on workers aged 38-42. The evolution of wage inequality for this age group
is representative of the evolution of inequality among a broader set of prime-aged
workers and the returns to skills evolve in the same way for workers aged 38-42 as
they do for workers aged 30-50 (see online Appendix). The advantage of basing
the main analysis on workers aged 38-42 (rather than individuals aged 30-50) is
that this group is observed throughout the time period 1992-2013, which we focus
on in our main analyses.10 Given the availability of draft data (the first available
draft cohort is born in 1951) we would miss older workers in the early part of the
period; for the later part of the time period coverage of the draft data is lower
for younger workers. For workers aged 38-42, on the other hand, we are able
to hold the age composition constant non-parametrically, which is an advantage
since returns to skills vary by age (Nybom, 2017). The availability of the draft
data, combined with the age restriction in our main analysis, means that our
analysis is based on 25 cohorts of males born between 1951 and 1975.
The data from the draft procedure include an overall measure of cognitive
skill and a corresponding measure of non-cognitive skill. The overall cognitive
score is based on four sub-tests measuring: inductive skill (or reasoning); verbal
comprehension; spatial ability; and technical understanding. Overall cognitive
skill is reported on an integer Stanine scale, which varies from one to nine.11 There
is a slight drift in the Stanines over cohorts and, therefore, we re-standardize the
cognitive score such that it has zero mean and unit standard deviation within
9 Online Appendix Section A2.3 describes the cross-walk between O*NET job attributes to the Swedish
occupational classification.
10 In Section A3.4 of the online Appendix, we present results for the population aged 30-50 during
1985-2013. This time window incorporates the severe crisis hitting Sweden in the late 1980s; for Sweden,
this “unemployment crisis” was more severe than the Great Recession. The results show that there is
more variation in the estimated returns, and this variation is arguably driven by the cycle, but that the
long-run trends are similar.
11 The Stanines are normally distributed with a mean of 5 and a standard deviation of 2. The data also
contain the raw scores on each subtest. We prefer to use the Stanine score, since we only have the Stanine
score for non-cognitive skill. Online Appendix Figure A1 shows that the spread of the distribution of raw
scores has not changed over time. Figure A12b shows that the return to the raw cognitive score evolved
in the same way as the return to the stanine cognitive score.

