Targeting In-Kind Transfers through Market Design: A
Revealed Preference Analysis of Public Housing Allocation
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0516.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: D47, D42, H40

Page 1 of 79

American Economic Review
2403 Sidney Street, Suite 260
Pittsburg, PA 15203
Disclosure Statement for “Targeting In-Kind Transfers Through Market Design: A
Revealed Preference Analysis of Public Housing Allocation”

I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests related to the research
described in this paper. Research support from the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship Program is gratefully acknowledged. I also thank the Cambridge
Housing Authority for providing the applicant and tenant data used in this research.
I obtained IRB approval for this research project from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and New York University.
Sincerely,

Daniel Waldinger
Assistant Professor
Department of Economics, New York University
New York, NY 10012
Email: danielwaldinger@nyu.edu

Page 2 of 79

Targeting In-Kind Transfers Through Market Design: A
Revealed Preference Analysis of Public Housing Allocation
By Daniel Waldinger∗
Public housing benefits are rationed through waitlists. Theoretical
work on public housing allocation has debated how much choice
applicants should have over units, identifying a possible trade-off
between efficiency and redistribution. This paper empirically establishes the existence and economic importance of this trade-off
using waitlist data from Cambridge, MA. I estimate a model of
public housing preferences in a setting where heterogeneous apartments are rationed through waiting time. Eliminating choice would
improve targeting but reduce tenant welfare by more than 30 percent. Such a change is only justified on targeting grounds by a
strong social preference for redistribution.
JEL: D42, D47, H40
Keywords: Dynamic Matching, Preference Estimation, Discrete
Choice Models, In-Kind Transfers
In the United States, more than one million low-income households live in public
housing. Beneficiaries receive a permanent, place-based entitlement to a rent
subsidy that often exceeds $10,000 per year. However, due to limited funding,
assistance is rationed – in 2012, 1.6 million U.S. households were on a public
housing waitlist (Collinson, Ellen and Ludwig, 2016). Given this scarcity, public
housing authorities (PHAs) in each city use a wide variety of rules to allocate
available apartments. Theoretical work on public housing allocation has debated
how much choice applicants should have over their assigned units, identifying a
possible trade-off between efficiency – maximizing the welfare gains for tenants
– and redistribution – targeting the most economically disadvantaged applicants
(Arnosti and Shi, 2020; Leshno, 2019). Yet, there has been little empirical work
quantifying how public housing waitlist policies affect who receives benefits or
how much beneficiaries value their assistance.
This paper empirically quantifies the trade-off between efficiency and redistri∗ Department of Economics, New York University, 19 West 4th St., New York, NY 10012 (email:
danielwaldinger@nyu.edu). I am grateful to Nikhil Agarwal, Parag Pathak, Michael Whinston, and Amy
Finkelstein for invaluable guidance and support. I also thank Nick Arnosti, Glenn Ellison, Ingrid GouldEllen, Tatiana Homonoff, John Lazarev, Jacob Leshno, Peng Shi, Paulo Somaini, Neil Thakral, and
Heidi Williams; seminar participants at the MIT Industrial Organization and Public Finance workshops,
and at several other universities; and my colleagues at NYU. Suggestions from the editor and four
anonymous referees greatly improved the paper. The Cambridge Housing Authority generously provided
the applicant and tenant data used in this paper, with special thanks to Tara Aubuchon, Tito Evora,
Michael Johnston, Jay Leslie, Hannah Lodi, and John Ziniewicz. All analysis and views expressed in this
paper are my own and do not represent the views of the Cambridge Housing Authority. I acknowledge
support from a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. All mistakes are my own.

1

Page 3 of 79

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

bution in public housing allocation. I use waitlist data from Cambridge, MA to
estimate the distribution of preferences for public housing developments based on
applicants’ decisions while on the waitlist. A central idea is that waiting time acts
as a price; some applicants face a trade-off between waiting for less time and being
assigned to their preferred housing development. In counterfactual simulations,
the trade-off between efficiency and redistribution exists and is quantitatively
significant. Eliminating choice would allocate housing to applicants with significantly worse outside options. However, the efficiency loss due to lower match
quality is only justified on targeting grounds by a strong preference for income
redistribution.
To gain intuition for how waitlist design might affect efficiency and redistribution, imagine applying for public housing in New York City and Miami. In New
York City, you are asked to choose your preferred housing development and wait
until an appropriate apartment becomes available. In Miami, you are offered the
first available apartment from any development when you reach the top of the
waitlist, and removed from the list if you decline. Theoretical work has argued
that not allowing choice, as in Miami, leads to lower match quality because applicants must accept mismatched offers in order to be housed (Thakral, 2016;
Leshno, 2019). However, not allowing choice has a potential benefit; it may improve targeting if applicants with unobservably better outside options are more
likely to reject, self-selecting out of the application process and making room for
more disadvantaged applicants (Arnosti and Shi, 2020). The existence and magnitude of this trade-off depend on applicant preferences: how much applicants
differ in where they want to live, how much they value assistance compared to
their outside options, and sensitivity of their development choices to waiting time.
The first part of this paper develops a method to estimate applicant preferences
using waitlist data. The data, provided by the Cambridge Housing Authority
(CHA), record which households applied for public housing in Cambridge, MA
over a 5-year period and contain rich development choice information. This provides a direct measure of which households expressed demand for assistance and
their willingness to wait for specific developments.
To recover the distribution of preferences from applicant decisions, I build a
structural model of application and development choice based on the structure of
the CHA’s allocation mechanism, henceforth the Cambridge Mechanism. Since
applicants choose their preferred housing development in two stages and receive
new information about waiting time in the second stage, they face a portfolio
choice problem (Chade and Smith, 2006). Second-stage choices are responsive
to new information, motivating a development choice model in which applicants
know their preferences over housing developments but face waiting time uncertainty. They choose their preferred distributions of assignments and waiting times
at each stage of the application process, given their current information.
Estimation proceeds in three steps. First, because applicants may be a selected
sample of eligible households, I estimate the distribution of households eligible

Page 4 of 79

VOL. VOLUME NO. ISSUETARGETING IN-KIND TRANSFERS THROUGH MARKET DESIGN3

for CHA public housing using American Community Survey data. Second, I
construct applicants’ beliefs about the distributions of assignments and waiting
times. I assume that beliefs match the long-run stationary distribution of the
Cambridge Mechanism generated by the empirical distribution of applicants and
their decisions. This assumption allows me to construct beliefs from the output
of a detailed simulation of the Cambridge Mechanism, using the data to estimate
a lower-dimensional set of inputs. Finally, I estimate preference parameters by
matching predicted choice patterns to those in the data using the method of
simulated moments (McFadden, 1989; Pakes and Pollard, 1989).
I parameterize preferences in a way that captures the potential trade-off between
efficiency and redistribution. Eligible households have a common discount factor,
but heterogeneous preferences both for specific developments (match values) and
for the aspects of public housing that are common across developments (values of
assistance). The value of assistance is interpreted relative to a household’s outside
option. To motivate this decomposition and facilitate welfare analysis, I assume
a utility model in which households have heterogeneous tastes for specific public
housing developments and different levels of income outside of public housing.
Importantly, part of the value of the household’s outside option is not observed
but affects their marginal utility of income. With restrictions on the functional
form of utility, indirect utilities can be converted to equivalent variation.
The application data and structure of the Cambridge Mechanism provide crucial
information about both dimensions of preference heterogeneity. Application rates
by income and demographic groups are informative about differences in values of
assistance. Because CHA applicants choose up to three developments in the
first stage, initial choices reveal heterogeneity in tastes for specific development
characteristics, including waiting time, as well as idiosyncratic tastes. Sensitivity
of second-stage development choices to waiting time information allows me to
estimate the discount factor in addition to the parameters governing flow payoffs.
The moments used in estimation capture these features of application decisions
and development choices.
Estimates show that applicants are patient and exhibit substantial heterogeneity in values of assistance and match values. While observed characteristics
strongly predict the value of assistance, particularly income and race, the standard deviation of the unobservable among applicants is equivalent to more than
$9,000 of annual income. Applicants also have strong preferences for specific
developments, and as a result, some applicants are quite selective. One in six
applicants would only be willing to live in three or fewer developments, while one
in four prefers any development to their outside option. Applicants in the latter
group have much lower observed incomes and unobservably worse outside options.
In contrast, because applicants are patient, development choices provide little information about need. It may therefore be possible to increase redistribution by
inducing rejections.
Using the estimated model, I predict equilibrium allocations in CHA public

Page 5 of 79

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

housing under two development choice systems: asking applicants to choose their
preferred development when they first apply (“Choose One”), and fully eliminating choice (“No Choice”). These two choice systems are common in practice
and respectively maximize match quality and targeting under certain conditions
(Arnosti and Shi, 2020). Under each policy, I solve for a fixed point between
applicants’ optimal decisions and their endogenously generated waiting time distributions, holding the public housing stock and other market primitives fixed.
Choice restrictions involve a dramatic trade-off between efficiency and redistribution. Under the current CHA priority system, moving from Choose One
to No Choice targets assistance to applicants with 19 percent worse outside options. Meanwhile, the fraction of tenants living in their first-choice development
falls from 58 to 9 percent, and equivalent variation per assigned unit falls by 35
percent. This trade-off persists if observed income is used to prioritize lowerincome or higher-income applicants, as is done in several cities. However, choice
restrictions are only justified on targeting grounds by a very strong preference
for redistribution. I use a “constant relative inequality aversion” class of social
welfare functions (Atkinson, 1970) to compare allocation mechanisms across a
range of values of redistribution. Under their current priority system, to justify
eliminating choice the CHA would need to be willing to take $8 from one household to transfer just $1 to a household with half as much income. The CHA
could achieve a similar increase in redistribution without lowering tenant values
by prioritizing lower-income applicants while still allowing choice. Unless there is
a large behavioral response to income-based priorities,1 these results suggest that
PHAs wishing to increase redistribution should first exploit observed characteristics through the priority system, and only remove choice as a last resort.
This paper contributes to the literatures on centralized matching markets,
means-tested housing assistance, and in-kind transfers. The growing literature
on revealed preference analysis of centralized matching markets has largely focused on static problems (Agarwal, 2015; Abdulkadiroğlu, Agarwal and Pathak,
2017; He, 2017; Agarwal and Somaini, 2018; Fack, Grenet and He, 2019), with two
notable exceptions: Agarwal et al. (2021) study the allocation of deceased donor
kidneys, and Reeling and Verdier (2020) study the allocation of hunting licenses
in Michigan. Both papers use dynamic discrete choice estimation techniques,
whereas I study a portfolio choice problem.
This paper also contributes to the literature on means-tested housing assistance
by using individual-level waitlist data to estimate demand for public housing.
Previous work has used data on assignments for this purpose (Geyer and Sieg,
2013; Van Ommeren and Van der Vlist, 2016; Sieg and Yoon, 2020). Other
empirical work has argued that there is substantial misallocation in the public
and rent-controlled housing sectors (Glaeser and Luttmer, 2003; Thakral, 2016).
A complementary literature evaluates the causal effects of housing assistance on
1 To my knowledge, there is no evidence on behavioral responses to changes in a priority system in a
dynamic matching mechanism, and the data and setting here were not suitable to provide evidence.

