The Economic Consequences of Bankruptcy Reform
By Tal Gross and Raymond Kluender and Feng Liu and Matthew J.
Notowidigdo and Jialan Wang∗
A more generous consumer bankruptcy system provides greater
insurance against financial risks but may also raise the cost of
credit. We study this trade-off using the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA), which increased the costs of filing for bankruptcy. We identify the effects
of BAPCPA on borrowing costs using variation in the effects of
the reform across credit scores. We find that a one-percentagepoint reduction in bankruptcy-filing risk decreased credit-card interest rates by 70–90 basis points. Conversely, BAPCPA reduced
the insurance value of bankruptcy, with uninsured hospitalizations
70 percent less likely to obtain bankruptcy relief after the reform.
JEL: K35, D14, D18
In recent decades, the rate of consumer bankruptcy filings in the United States
climbed from 0.3 percent of households annually in the early 1980s to 1.5 percent in the early 2000s (Board of Governors, 2006). This five-fold increase in the
bankruptcy rate was cited by lawmakers as a reason to pass the 2005 Bankruptcy
Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA). The bill implemented a number of provisions that collectively made filing for bankruptcy more
onerous, more expensive, and less financially beneficial.
By making bankruptcy less attractive, BAPCPA was widely expected to reduce
bankruptcy filings; however, there was considerable debate regarding how the reform would affect consumer credit markets. Proponents of the bill argued that
creditors would pass through higher debt-recovery rates to borrowers in the form
∗ Gross: Questrom School of Business, Boston University, 595 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA
02215, talgross@bu.edu. Kluender: Harvard Business School, Harvard University, Rock Center 217, Soldiers Field Road, Boston, MA 02163, rkluender@hbs.edu. Liu: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
1700 G St NW, Washington, DC 20552, feng.liu@cfpb.gov. Notowidigdo: Booth School of Business,
University of Chicago, 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, noto@chicagobooth.edu. Wang:
Gies College of Business, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 470 D Wohlers Hall, 1206 South
Sixth Street, Champaign, IL 61820, jialanw@illinois.edu. The views expressed are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or the United States.
We thank Huan Zhao, staff at the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development,
and Carlos Dobkin for their assistance accessing and compiling datasets used in this project. We are
grateful to Amy Finkelstein, Andra Ghent, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Erik Hurst, Richard Hynes, Sasha
Indarte, Neale Mahoney, Brian Melzer, Scott Nelson, Christopher Palmer, James Poterba, Amit Seru,
Tavneet Suri, Heidi Williams, Jonathan Zinman, four anonymous referees, and seminar participants at
MIT, NYU, AEA Annual Meeting, Harvard Business School (EM), Arizona, Arizona State, CU Leeds
(Finance), Wharton (BEPP), the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Microsoft Research, Montana
State, GWU, CFPB, Duke Fuqua (Finance), Harvard Law School, MoFIR, Johns Hopkins, WAPFIN,
NBER Summer Institute Corporate Finance and Law and Economics, and SFS Cavalcade sessions for
thoughtful feedback and comments. Anran Li, Pinchuan Ong, and Calvin Jahnke provided excellent
research assistance.

1

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

of lower interest rates. Judge Richard Posner argued that “the new Act. . . should
reduce interest rates and thus make borrowers better off” (Posner, 2005). By
contrast, critics of the reform argued that a reduction in filings would not be
passed-through to borrowers but would instead be captured by lenders.1 Additionally, critics contended that claims of abuse were overstated and that the
bill would harm filers struggling with medical expenses and job loss (Warren and
Tyagi, 2005).
This paper informs this debate by estimating how BAPCPA affected the number of bankruptcy filings, the interest rates offered to consumers in unsecured
credit markets, and the likelihood an individual obtains bankruptcy relief in the
wake of an adverse health shock. First, we develop a stylized model of consumer
bankruptcy to study the relationship between the bankruptcy-filing rate and the
cost of credit. We use the model to calibrate a benchmark for the effects of
bankruptcy reform on interest rates and find an interest-rate pass-through of 80–
113 basis points for each one-percentage-point change in the bankruptcy-filing
rate.
Second, we document that the reform indeed dramatically decreased the number
of bankruptcies. We establish this using techniques developed in the recent tax
notch literature (Kleven and Waseem, 2013). We use this approach to estimate
the net effect of BAPCPA after accounting for the large increase in bankruptcies
just prior to the effective date of BAPCPA in October 2005.2 In the months
immediately before the reform, we estimate a net increase in filings of more than
750,000, as consumers rushed to file for bankruptcy before the new bankruptcy
code was implemented. Over time, however, we find that the reform reduced
the bankruptcy rate by roughly 50 percent. Net of the short-run increase during
the “rush-to-file period,” we estimate that there were roughly one million fewer
bankruptcy filings in the two years after BAPCPA than would have occurred
without the reform.
One of the central provisions of BAPCPA was a “means test” which restricted
the options available to high-income filers and was intended to “ensure that
debtors repay creditors the maximum they can afford” (House Report, 2005).
The means test was designed to shift filers with higher incomes from Chapter 7
to Chapter 13 by eliminating the option to file under Chapter 7.3 Counter to the
intent of the law, we find no change in the distribution of income of bankruptcy
filers when we proxy for income using the median income in the filer’s ZIP Code.4
1 For instance, Warren (2004) wrote that the “industry never said that the $44 billion it planned to
recover from bankrupt families would be passed on to customers. History suggests that it would not.”
2 Specifically, we estimate the “excess mass” and “missing mass” of bankruptcy filings around the
effective date of BAPCPA to recover a net effect of BAPCPA.
3 Chapter 7 bankruptcy offers filers a “fresh start.” All qualifying debts are discharged in exchange
for filers’ non-exempt assets. Chapter 13 bankruptcy offers filers a “reorganization.” Chapter 13 filers
lose no assets, but must commit to a repayment plan out of their future income.
4 Additionally, we find only a small increase in the share of Chapter 13 filings and find that filings of
both chapters declined after the reform. These results suggest that the BAPCPA caused large declines
in bankruptcy rates across a broad range of consumers, swamping an effect of the means test on inducing
consumers to switch between Chapter 7 and Chapter 13.

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF BANKRUPTCY REFORM

3

This evidence suggests that the decline in bankruptcies caused by BAPCPA was
not concentrated among high-income filers as policymakers had intended.
Third, we estimate the pass-through of the change in bankruptcy filings to
interest rates by exploiting variation in the effect of the reform on bankruptcy
filings across credit scores. To do so, we first estimate the effect of BAPCPA on
the bankruptcy-filing rate within each 10-point credit-score segment using creditreport data for a large sample of individuals. We combine the change in filing
risk with proprietary data on interest rates of credit-card offers for the same
segments. We then estimate event-study and difference-in-difference regression
models that compare the change in the average credit-card interest rate to the
change in filing risk for each credit-score segment before and after the reform.
The key identifying assumption is that interest rates would have evolved similarly
across credit-score segments absent the reform. We provide evidence supporting
this “common trends” assumption with an event-study figure, which shows no
differential trends across credit-score segments in the years leading up to the
reform. We also show that the main results are robust to subprime-by-year-month
fixed effects, suggesting that the results are not driven by other unobserved factors
differentially affecting the subprime credit market during this time period.
We find that a one-percentage-point decline in bankruptcy-filing risk within a
credit-score segment decreases average interest rates by 70–90 basis points. Interpreting these estimates through the lens of the model-based calibration, we
conclude that a meaningful share of the cost savings to creditors was passed on
to consumers in the form of lower interest rates. Additionally, according to the
model, the pass-through results imply that lenders expected that the marginal
non-filers — i.e., the consumers deterred from filing by BAPCPA — would ultimately repay a meaningful share of their unsecured debts. We use detailed
loan-level data to provide corroborating evidence that the interest-rate response
we estimate is associated with real changes in loan performance for loans that
originated after BAPCPA.
Our last contribution is documenting that BAPCPA reduced the bankruptcyfiling rate following a hospital admission. Building on the event-study approach of
Dobkin et al. (2018a) that uses variation in the timing of hospitalizations, we find
that an uninsured hospitalization increases the likelihood of filing for bankruptcy
by 1.5 percentage points prior to the reform, but by just 0.4 percentage points
after the reform. The reduction in the likelihood that an uninsured hospitalization
obtains bankruptcy relief occurs right around the implementation of BAPCPA,
and the reduction is persistent. While a hospitalization is just one example of
an adverse shock, to the extent that this finding generalizes to other types of
adverse shocks, these results provide suggestive evidence that the bankruptcies
deterred by BAPCPA were not limited to the most “abusive” filings. Instead,
these results imply that BAPCPA may have meaningfully reduced the insurance
value of bankruptcy.5
5 While the share of all bankruptcies caused by hospitalizations appears to be small according to

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

Taken together, the results in this paper suggest that BAPCPA reduced bankruptcy
filings, but not in the targeted way that proponents had intended. Nevertheless,
the law still appears to have provided some benefits to consumers in the form of
lower credit-card interest rates, and the model clarifies that the pass-through we
estimate is consistent with relatively high “all-in” costs of filing (accounting for
the filing fees, legal costs, and stigma costs associated with filing). Our results
highlight the stark trade-off for policymakers: marginal non-filers may benefit
substantially from a more generous bankruptcy system (getting a “fresh start”
instead of repaying a meaningful share of their debts), but these benefits come at
the cost of higher interest rates for other consumers.
This paper contributes to three main areas of research. First, it contributes
new, reduced-form empirical evidence on the effects of BAPCPA. Several previous studies have explored the impacts of BAPCPA using reduced-form methods.
Albanesi and Nosal (2018) study the likelihood that consumers delinquent on their
debts transition to declaring bankruptcy and estimate transition probabilities before and after BAPCPA. They find that transition probabilities into Chapter 7
bankruptcy decreased after BAPCPA, while transition probabilities into insolvency increased. Chakrabarti and Pattison (2019) focus on BAPCPA’s effect
on auto loans, in particular the reform’s elimination of “cramdowns” in Chapter
13.6 The authors compare the impact of BAPCPA in states with a high share
of Chapter 13 bankruptcies to states in which Chapter 13 was historically rare
and find the elimination of auto loan cramdowns under Chapter 13 reduced interest rates on auto loans. There exist relatively few other reduced-form studies of
BAPCPA’s effect on credit-market outcomes. Li, White and Zhu (2011) examine
mortgages and find that, by worsening the bankruptcy option for homeowners,
BAPCPA increased foreclosure rates.7
Relative to these previous studies, this paper estimates the causal impact of
the reform on interest rates for unsecured loans, the most commonly held type
of debt and the most frequently discharged in bankruptcy. We are not aware of
other work that uses variation in the effect of BAPCPA on bankruptcy filings
across credit scores for identification. We develop this empirical approach, assess
its validity, and present the first quasi-experimental estimates of the effect of
BAPCPA on credit-card interest rates.8 This paper also estimates changes in the
rate at which uninsured hospitalizations lead to bankruptcy around the time of
BAPCPA, which speaks to the “insurance value” of bankruptcy. Both of these
estimates are key inputs into a more comprehensive evaluation of bankruptcy
reform and speak to the trade-off of lower interest rates versus more generous
Dobkin et al. (2018b), it is a frequently-cited source of financial risk faced by households and one the
bankruptcy system is frequently referenced as insuring.
6 Cramdowns in Chapter 13 allowed borrowers to reduce the principal of their loan to the current
market value of the vehicle.
7 Mitman (2016) and Morgan, Iverson and Botsch (2012) also conclude that the reform increased
foreclosure rates.
8 Severino and Brown (2017) study the effect of bankruptcy on interest rates for unsecured credit but
focus on the pre-BAPCPA era, studying changes in state homestead exemptions.

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF BANKRUPTCY REFORM

5

social insurance.
Second, this paper is related to studies of the consumer bankruptcy system that
calibrate structural models (Zame, 1993; Dubey, Geanakoplos and Shubik, 2005;
Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt, 2007; Chatterjee et al., 2007; Mitman, 2016; Nakajima, 2017). Those models emphasize the trade-off between using bankruptcy to
smooth consumption across states of the world and the higher cost of smoothing
consumption over time, often while assuming perfectly competitive credit markets
(and thus full pass-through of the costs of lending to consumers). Our estimates
of interest-rate pass-through provide some empirical support to the assumptions
underlying these models of bankruptcy and credit markets.
Finally, this paper provides new evidence on pass-through in consumer credit
markets. Existing research on pass-through in credit markets emphasizes sticky
interest rates (and thus limited pass-through), but this research typically estimates pass-through using shocks to the cost of funds rather than shocks to default risk (e.g., Ausubel, 1991; Calem and Mester, 1995; Stavins, 1996; Stango,
2000; Calem, Gordy and Mester, 2006; Agarwal et al., 2017). We thus contribute
new evidence to this literature by estimating how changes in bankruptcy-filing
risk are passed-through to credit-card interest rates. While a full reconciliation of
the different pass-through estimates is beyond the scope of this paper, Grodzicki
(2017) argues that credit-card markets have become more competitive in recent
years following the costly adoption of screening technology, which is consistent
with the price responsiveness to changes in default risk that we document in this
paper.9
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides
background information on bankruptcy before and after BAPCPA. Section II
describes our data sources and sample construction. Section III develops a simple
model that we use to calibrate a benchmark for the effects of bankruptcy reform
on interest rates. Section IV evaluates how BAPCPA affected the number of
bankruptcy filings. Section V then estimates the pass-through of this decline in
bankruptcy to borrowing costs. Section VI estimates the effect of BAPCPA on
the bankruptcy-filing rate following a hospital admission. Section VII concludes.
I.

Institutional Background

In contrast to other developed countries, American consumers have historically enjoyed an exceptionally debtor-friendly bankruptcy system.10 In particular, American consumers filing for bankruptcy have had the option to freely
choose between a “fresh start” (liquidating outstanding debts through Chapter
7) and a “reorganization” of debts (repaying debts on an installment plan over
9 More broadly, this paper is also related to other empirical studies of pass-through in imperfectly
competitive markets, such as recent work on Medicare Advantage (Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney, 2018)
and the Spanish electricity market (Fabra and Reguant, 2014).
10 Italy, for instance, had no form of consumer bankruptcy until 2015, and Germany only began
allowing consumer bankruptcy in 1999. Before then, consumers in those countries had few options to
discharge their debts (Tabb, 2005).

6

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

several years through Chapter 13). Chapter 7 filers must forfeit all non-exempt
assets in exchange for discharge of their debt, while Chapter 13 filers are allowed
to keep all of their assets but must repay their debt out of future income.
Despite the potential financial benefits for many consumers, consumer bankruptcy
has historically been a relatively rare phenomenon in the United States. In the
late 1970s, just 0.3 percent of households filed for bankruptcy in a given year.
In 1978, the United States adopted a new bankruptcy code and legalized advertisements by bankruptcy attorneys. A 1978 Supreme Court decision allowed
banks to export their home interest rates and effectively evade state usury laws.11
These changes in policy catalyzed the growth of unsecured borrowing in the ensuing decades (White, 2007). By 1999, the bankruptcy rate had increased to 1.5
percent annually, prompting creditors to lobby for a more stringent bankruptcy
code.
To make their case, credit-industry lobbyists pointed to a handful of high-profile
cases of “exemption shopping.” For those bankruptcies, debtors moved across
state lines to select the most beneficial bankruptcy regime, and this was held up
as emblematic of the abuse rampant in the bankruptcy system. A reform of the
bankruptcy system was first drafted in 1998 and passed by Congress in 2000,
but pocket-vetoed by President Clinton. The bill was reintroduced each Congress
until it finally passed with broad bipartisan support in 2005. The Senate passed
the bill on March 10, 2005, the House on April 14, 2005, and the bill was signed
by President Bush on April 20, 2005. The new bankruptcy code went into effect
for all bankruptcies filed on or after Monday, October 17, 2005.
BAPCPA made filing for bankruptcy less attractive in three primary ways.
First, the law sought to prohibit higher-income households from filing Chapter 7.
To do so, lawmakers introduced a means test which they referred to as “the heart
of the bill” (House Report, 2005). The means test added a “presumption of abuse”
for filers whose income is above certain thresholds. Debtors are subject to the
means test if their income from the previous six full months before filing, adjusted
for family size, is more than the state median income (Parra, 2018).12 Debtors
subject to the means test are functionally prohibited from filing Chapter 7 and
can only file Chapter 13 (which, post-BAPCPA, required higher repayment). This
created an incentive for borrowers to suppress their labor supply and earnings
below the state median in order to skirt the means test and file Chapter 7 or
reduce their repayment obligation under Chapter 13.13
11 In Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corporation (439 U.S.
299 (1978)), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that state anti-usury laws regulating interest rates are not
enforceable against nationally chartered banks based in other states.
12 Virtually all income is included in this calculation with the notable exception of Social Security
income. Those with debts that are not “primarily consumer debts” (e.g., business investments) are also
exempt from the means test. Debtors with monthly disposable income of less than $100.00 were exempt
and this cutoff increased to $166.67 depending on the share of unsecured debt this represents. Beginning
in 2007, these numbers increased to $109.58 and $182.50.
13 The incentive to suppress income prior to filing is relevant even if households cannot suppress it
enough to get under the state median. Chapter 13 repayment plans, which are paid over the subsequent
five years, are based on documented disposable income over the prior six months. As White (2007)

