Small and Large Firms Over the Business Cycle
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2018-1499.R3
Manuscript Type: Administrator
Keywords: Firm size, business cycles, financial accelerator.

Page 1 of 254

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
Nicolas Crouzet, September 25th, 2018

Page 2 of 254

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
Neil Mehrotra, September 25th, 2018

Page 3 of 254

Small and Large Firms Over the Business Cycle∗
Nicolas Crouzet†
This version:

Neil R. Mehrotra‡
June 15, 2020

Abstract
This paper uses new confidential Census data to revisit the relationship between firm size,
cyclicality, and financial frictions. First, we find that large firms (the top 1% by size) are less
cyclically sensitive than the rest. Second, high and rising concentration implies that the higher
cyclicality of the bottom 99% of firms only has a modest impact on aggregate fluctuations.
Third, differences in cyclicality are not simply explained by financing, and in fact appear largely
unrelated to proxies for financial strength. We instead provide evidence for an alternative
mechanism based on the industry scope of the very largest firms.

Keywords: Firm size, business cycles, financial accelerator.

∗

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the view of the
US Census Bureau, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. All findings have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. We thank the editor, Gita Gopinath, and three
anonymous referees and seminar and conference participants at Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Boston College,
Boston University, Brown University, Chicago Booth, Colby College, Duke Finance, the Federal Reserve Board,
Imperial College, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Minneapolis Fed, Notre Dame, Northwestern Kellogg,
Society for Economic Dynamics, NBER Monetary Economics, NBER SI Capital Markets, NBER SI EFCE, Minnesota
Macro, the Philadelphia Fed, Pittsburgh/Carnegie Mellon, the University of North Carolina, UCLA, and Wharton for
useful comments. We thank our formal discussants: Paco Buera, Simon Gilchrist, John Haltiwanger, Isabelle Méjean,
Morten Ravn and Vincenzo Quadrini. We also thank Andy Atkeson, Manuel Amador, Cristina Arellano, Scott Baker,
Effi Benmelech, V.V. Chari, Larry Christiano, Anna Cieslak, Janice Eberly, Mark Gertler, Kyle Herkenhoff, Ben
Iverson, Patrick Kehoe, Ellen McGrattan, Fabrizio Perri, Mitchell Petersen, Ben Pugsley, Adriano Rampini, Ricardo
Reis, Jón Steinsson, Julia Thomas, Johannes Wieland, and Thomas Winberry for helpful discussions and useful
suggestions. We thank Apoorv Gupta, Alice Jun, and Adriana Troiano for excellent research assistance.
†
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, 2211 N Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208; e-mail:
n-crouzet@kellogg.northwestern.edu.
‡
33 Liberty Street, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, NY, 10045; e-mail: neil.mehrotra@ny.frb.org.

Page 4 of 254

An important line of research in macroeconomics and corporate finance documents crosssectional differences in the response of firms to aggregate shocks. Following the work of Gertler and
Gilchrist (1994), this literature has paid close attention to firm size. This focus was motivated by
the idea that, since size may proxy for financial constraints, a greater sensitivity of small firms to
the cycle would provide evidence in favor of the “financial accelerator” — the view that financial
frictions can amplify the response of the economy to aggregate shocks.1 However, largely because
of data limitations, vigorous debate remains as to both the basic facts and their financial interpretation. More generally, relatively little is known about systematic differences in sensitivity of firms
to the business cycle.
In this paper, we bring new evidence to bear on these issues. We address three questions. First,
are small firms more cyclically sensitive than large firms and if so, to what extent? Second, what
would happen to aggregate fluctuations if the sensitivity of small firms matched that of large firms?
Third, is this greater sensitivity a manifestation of differences in access to financing?
Our new evidence comes from the confidential microdata underlying the US Census Bureau’s
Quarterly Financial Report (QFR), a survey that collects income statements and balance sheets
of manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade firms. The QFR uniquely provides balance-sheet
and income-statement data for smaller, private firms over a long period; a priori, this is a set of
firms that one expects to be most financially constrained. We use QFR micro records to assemble
a representative, quarterly panel of US manufacturing firms from 1977 to 2014. The resulting
dataset is made up of approximately 1.1 million observations on 90000 different firms. We use this
dataset to quantify the greater sensitivity of firms at the bottom of the size distribution, relate it to
the behavior of aggregate quantities, and assess whether it is evidence of a financial amplification
mechanism.
To our knowledge, this paper is the first to use this firm-level data in its panel format. In contrast
to the public releases of the QFR, the microdata allows us to accurately measure the magnitude
of differences in cyclicality by firms size and to introduce firm level controls to determine the
financial or non-financial factors that drive the size effect. As we detail in the paper, the existing
literature that relies on the public releases has disagreed on the former and cannot address the
latter.2 Finally, the firm level data allows us to determine whether any average differences across
firm size are statistically significant.
Using the QFR microdata, we find evidence of greater cyclical sensitivity among small firms.
On average over the sample, the difference between sales growth of the bottom 99% of firms and
the top 1% of firms (by book assets) exhibits a strong contemporaneous correlation with GDP. Our
baseline estimate is that a 1% drop in GDP is associated with a 2.5% drop in sales at the top 1%
1

The view that financial frictions may be responsible for the greater sensitivity of small firms to recessions is
buttressed by an extensive corporate finance literature in which private and bank-dependent firms are often treated
as being more financially constrained, and which we discuss in Section 1.
2
Estimates of the higher cyclicality of small firms range from small firms being approximately twice as responsive
to monetary shocks than large firms (Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994), to being equally responsive to recessions (Chari,
Christiano and Kehoe, 2013; Kudlyak and Sanchez, 2017), to being significantly less responsive (Moscarini and
Postel-Vinay, 2012).

1

Page 5 of 254

of firms and a 3.1% drop in sales in the bottom 99%. The size asymmetry also appears in firm level
regressions that control for industry and disaggregate firms into finer-size quantiles. We adopt this
stark notion of small and large in large measure because of the absence of measurable differences
within the bottom 99%.
The size effect is concentrated at the very top of the distribution — the top 0.5% of firms;
variation in elasticity of sales to GDP outside of the top 0.5% is small and statistically insignificant.
In and of itself, the wide range of firm size with no measurable size differences in cyclicality suggests
that financial factors may not account for the size effect. Firm size in our data ranges from less
than $200K in assets for the smallest firms to $750 million (real 2009 dollars) in assets for firms in
the 99th percentile; it is not obvious that financial frictions should be similarly severe over such a
wide range of firm size.
The greater sensitivity we uncover for sales growth at small firms also holds for inventory growth
and investment rates. As with sales growth, this differential is concentrated at the top 0.5% of the
asset distribution. Additionally, we show that these results survive a large battery of robustness
tests and that they also hold in the retail and wholesale trade portions of the QFR sample. Finally,
we compare our results to prior work on difference in cyclicality across size groups, in particular,
we show how growth rates derived from the microdata deliver consistent and stable estimates of
the size effect, improving on the previous literature.
We find that the greater sensitivity of the bottom 99% of firms, although statistically significant,
is too small in magnitude to have an effect on the cyclical behavior of aggregates. Our data allows
us to construct counterfactual paths for aggregate sales growth, inventory growth, and investment
under the alternative assumption that cyclical sensitivities are the same in the cross-section and
plot these counterfactuals against realized aggregate sales growth. The difference (seen in Figure
3) is negligible. This finding is due to combination of extreme skewness of the distribution of sales
and investment in the cross-section and absence of sizable differences in cyclicality. For instance,
the top 1% of firms accounts for approximately 75% of total sales and 85% of total investment in
the latter parts of the sample. Moreover, this concentration has been rising over the last 30 years.3
Our findings verifying the greater cyclicality of small firms beg the question of whether these
differences in cyclicality are driven by a financial accelerator mechanism. Gertler and Gilchrist
(1994) argued that size serves as a proxy for the degree of financial constraints given that small
firms exhibit greater bank dependence, cannot issue debt publicly, and face greater idiosyncratic
risk. We verify that it is indeed the case that small firms differ from large firms along these
dimensions.4 However, we provide three findings that cast doubt on whether the size effect is
evidence of a financial accelerator mechanism.
First, we introduce direct controls for balance sheet ratios emphasized in the financial frictions
3

This rise in concentration mirrors the findings of Autor et al. (2017), though we find that rising sales concentration
in manufacturing comes in two waves (the early 1980s and late 1990s). Our findings with respect to skewness also
echo Gabaix (2011), but we nevertheless find that cyclical fluctuations at the “median” firm (which is too small to
affect aggregates) correlates strongly with aggregate fluctuations.
4
However, importantly, these average differences in capital structure across size groups is dwarfed by heterogeneity
in capital structure within each size group.

2

