Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor Shares
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0350.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
15-Sep-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Grossman, Gene; Princeton University, Economics;
Helpman, Elhanan; Harvard University, Department of Economics;
Oberfield, Ezra; Princeton University, Department of Economics
Sampson, Thomas; London School of Economics, Economics
Keywords:

E13, O14, neoclassical growth, balanced growth, human capital,
education, capital-skill complementarity, labor share

Page 1 of 29

Disclosure Statement by Elhanan Helpman
RE: Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor Shares

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.

September 12, 2020

Page 2 of 29

Disclosure Statement by Gene M. Grossman
RE: Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor Shares
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.

Page 3 of 29

Endogenous Education and Long-run Factor Shares
Disclosure Statement by Thomas Sampson

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.

14th September 2020

Page 4 of 29

Endogenous Education and Long-Run Factor Shares
By Gene M. Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Ezra Oberfield and Thomas Sampson∗
We study the determinants of factor shares in a neoclassical environment with capital-skill complementarity and endogenous education. In this environment estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor that fail to account for human
capital levels will be biased upwards. We develop a model with
overlapping generations, technology-driven neoclassical growth and
ongoing increases in educational attainment. For a class of production functions featuring capital-skill complementarity, a balanced
growth path exists and is characterized by an inverse relationship
between the rates of capital- and labor-augmenting technological
progress and the capital share in national income.
JEL: E25, J24, O41
Keywords: Neoclassical growth, Balanced growth, Human capital,
Education, Technological progress, Capital-skill complementarity,
Labor share, Capital share
Ever since John Maynard Keynes (1939, p.48) famously touted the stability of the capital and
labor shares in national income as “one of the most surprising, yet best-established, facts in the
whole range of economic statistics,” growth theorists have been fascinated by the determinants
of long-run factor shares and the reasons for their stability. Kaldor (1961) made the constancy
of factor shares first of his six ‘stylized’ facts of economic growth and many economists have
observed the continued stability of these shares well beyond the time of his writing. But, in
recent years, the labor share declined precipitously, as has been documented and discussed by
Elsby et al. (2013), Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), and many others. Now, the factor
shares may well have stabilized again, with workers receiving a new and smaller slice of the
economic pie.1 These events have revived interest among growth economists in the determinants
of the functional distribution of income.
If income shares are stable for long periods in the face of factor accumulation and (biased)
technical progress, some equilibrating forces must be at work. A unitary aggregate elasticity
of substitution between capital and labor could be one such force, because in a Cobb-Douglas
world, any persistent divergence between the growth rates of the labor force and the capital
stock would be offset by opposing trends in factor returns. But a large body of empirical research
suggests that the elasticity of substitution is not equal to one.2 In Grossman et. al (2017a),
∗ Grossman: Princeton University, Department of Economics, Princeton, NJ 08544 (e-mail: grossman@princeton.edu);
Helpman: Harvard University and CIFAR, 1805 Cambridge Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 (e-mail: ehelpman@harvard.edu); Oberfield: Princeton University, Department of Economics, Princeton, NJ 08544 (e-mail:
edo@princeton.edu); Sampson: London School of Economics, Centre for Economic Performance, Houghton Street, London,
WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom (e-mail: t.a.sampson@lse.ac.uk). This paper evolved from our earlier working paper, “The
Productivity Slowdown and the Declining Labor Share: A Neoclassical Exploration,” although the focus of the paper has
changed substantially. We are grateful to Ben Bridgman, Andrew Glover, Chad Jones, Jacob Short, Gianluca Violante,
and Ariel Weinberger for discussions and suggestions on the earlier paper.
1 See, for example, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Labor Share [PRS85006173], retrieved
from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PRS85006173, March 8, 2020.
2 See, for example, Chirinko (2008, p.671), who surveyed many studies that sought to measure this elasticity and
concluded that ”the weight of the evidence usggests a value of [the elasticity of substitution] in the range of 0.4 to 0.6.” In
research conducted after that survey was written, Karabarbounis and Neimann (2014) estimate an elasticity of substitution

1

Page 5 of 29

we suggested another possible equilibrating force: the endogenous response of education to a
rise in the return to schooling could stabilize factor shares in the face of ongoing declines in
the prices of investment goods if the aggregate technology exhibits complementarity between
capital and skills.3
Our previous paper focused on the requirements for balanced growth. We explored a model
with fleeting lifespans and derived necessary and sufficient conditions for constant steady-state
factor shares in the presence of ongoing capital-augmenting technological progress and a nonunitary aggregate elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. In particular, we identified a class of aggregate production functions characterized by capital-skill complementarity
that deliver balanced growth. However, our model could not speak to changes in the steadystate factor shares, because our convenient assumption of fleeting lives severed all links between
these shares and parameters of the growth process.
In this paper, we allow for longer lives, which renders investment in education a forwardlooking decision. In the body of our text, we focus on a model in which all individuals accumulate human capital by spending time in school. But our results are not limited to this model
of educational attainment; in the appendix, we establish similar results in a model of discrete
occupational choice with endogenous fractions of the population opting to become skilled.
We begin in Section I by examining the link between equilibrium factor shares, levels of
human capital, and the rental rate for capital in a competitive economy with an aggregate
production function characterized by capital-skill complementarity. In such a setting, a greater
level of human capital goes hand in hand with a greater capital share, whereas an inverse
relationship exists between the rental rate and the capital share whenever the elasticity of
substitution between capital and raw labor falls short of one. In Section II, we introduce
schooling as an intertemporal choice for overlapping generations of the population. In our
setting of “perpetual youth” with a constant hazard rate of death, it is optimal for members of
each generation to attend school fully until they achieve a (time-varying) target level of human
capital, whereupon they enter the work force but continue their education part-time to keep
pace with the growing human-capital threshold. When capital and skills are complementary,
there is an inverse equilibrium relationship between the education target and both the rental
rate on capital and the difference between the interest rate and the growth rate of wages. Taken
together, the results in Sections I and II imply that failing to control for variation in human
capital will lead to upward bias in estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor in an economy with capital-skill complementarity.
Finally, in Section III, we close the model and study neoclassical growth driven by exogenous
technological progress. The dynamic equilibrium features ongoing accumulation of physical
and human capital. We establish the existence of a unique balanced growth path when skills
are complementary to capital and human capital enters the aggregate production function
in a particular way. Along this path, the downward pressure on the capital share due to
accumulation of better and cheaper machinery is offset by upward pressure from investments
in skills that are complementary to those machines. In the long run, the human capital target
substantially greater than one, while Herrendorff et. al (2015) find an elasticity of 0.84 and Oberfield and Raval (2020)
estimate it between 0.5 and 0.7 for the U.S. manufacturing sector.
3 Acemoglu (2003) proposes yet another equilibrating force: when firms choose between capital-augmenting and laboraugmenting technological improvements, they may tend toward only the latter in the long run. In his setting, factor shares
evolve during a transition phase with capital-augmenting progress, but stabilize in the steady state due to the eventual
dominance of technical change directed to labor. One difficulty with this story is that quality-adjusted prices of capital
goods have declined signficantly over long periods, suggesting an ongoing process of investment-specific technological
change.

