Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0304.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: C91, C92, D72

Page 1 of 80

Disclosure Statement for S. Nageeb Ali

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in the paper, “Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory”.

S. Nageeb Ali,
Professor of Economics,
Penn State University

Page 2 of 80

Disclosure Statement for Maximilian Mihm

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper, “Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory”.

Maximilian Mihm,
Associate Professor of Economics,
New York University Abu Dhabi

Page 3 of 80

Disclosure Statement for Lucas Siga

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in the paper, “Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory”.

Lucas Siga,
Assistant Professor of Economics,
New York University Abu Dhabi

Page 4 of 80

Disclosure Statement for Chloe Tergiman

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper, “Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory”.

Chloe Tergiman,
Assistant Professor in the Smeal College of Business,
Penn State University

Page 5 of 80

Adverse and Advantageous Selection in the Laboratory∗
S. Nageeb Ali†

Maximilian Mihm‡

Lucas Siga§

Chloe Tergiman¶

January 26, 2021

Abstract
We study two-player games where one-sided asymmetric information can lead to
either adverse or advantageous selection. We contrast behavior in these games with
settings where both players are uninformed. We find stark differences, suggesting
that subjects do account for endogenous selection effects. Removing strategic uncertainty increases the fraction of subjects who account for selection. Subjects respond
more to adverse than advantageous selection. Using additional treatments where
we vary payoff feedback, we connect this difference to learning. We also observe a
significant fraction of subjects who appear to understand selection effects but do not
apply that knowledge.
JEL: C91, C92, D72, D81, D82.

∗

We thank the co-editor and three anonymous referees for their thoughtful and constructive feedback,
and Colin Camerer, Juan Carrillo, Alex Imas, Ryan Oprea, Emanuel Vespa, and Sevgi Yuksel for useful
comments and suggestions. Robizon Khubulashvili provided excellent research assistance and programming. We are grateful to REF grant #RE099 for funding this experiment.
†
Department of Economics, Penn State. Email: nageeb@psu.edu.
‡
Division of Social Science, NYU-Abu Dhabi. Email: max.mihm@nyu.edu.
§
Division of Social Science, NYU-Abu Dhabi. Email: lucas.siga@nyu.edu.
¶
Smeal College of Business, Penn State. Email: cjt16@psu.edu.

