The Nature of Firm Growth
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0748.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E24, E23, D22

Page 1 of 107

August 1, 2020
To whom it may concern:
For the research that resulted in “The Nature of Firm Growth,” I attest to the following:
1. Financial support for my research came from the University of Notre Dame and the
Kauffman Foundation.
2. I have not received any financial or in-kind support for this research from anyone other
than the entities listed above.
3. I have no paid or unpaid positions as officer, director, or board member of any relevant
non-profit organizations or profit-making entities.
4. I have no close relative or partners who received financial support from or work in any
position at any relevant entity.
5. Some of the results presented in the appendix use data from the Longitudinal Business
Database at the U.S. Census Bureau that are not publicly available. These results have been
reviewed by the Census to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
Sincerely,
Benjamin W. Pugsley
Assistant Professor of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3029 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46656
benjamin.pugsley@nd.edu

Page 2 of 107

August 7, 2020
To whom it may concern:

For the research that resulted in “The Nature of Firm Growth,” I attest to the following:
1. Financial support for my research came from the University of Oxford and the European
Research Council.
2. I have not received any financial or in-kind support for this research from anyone other
than the entities listed above.
3. I have no paid or unpaid positions as officer, director, or board member of any relevant
non-profit organizations or profit-making entities.
4. I have no close relative or partners who received financial support from or work in any
position at any relevant entity.
5. Some of the results presented in the appendix use data from the Longitudinal Business
Database at the U.S. Census Bureau that are not publicly available. These results have been
reviewed by the Census to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.

Sincerely,

Petr Sedláček
Professor of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford, OX1 3UQ
petr.sedlacek@economics.ox.ac.uk

Page 3 of 107

August 7, 2020
To whom it may concern:
For the research that resulted in “The Nature of Firm Growth,” I attest to the following:
1. Financial support for my research came from the Economic and Social Research Council.
2. I have not received any financial or in-kind support for this research from anyone other
than the entities listed above.
3. I have no paid or unpaid positions as officer, director, or board member of any relevant
non-profit organizations or profit-making entities.
4. I have no close relative or partners who received financial support from or work in any
position at any relevant entity.
5. Some of the results presented in the appendix use data from the Longitudinal Business
Database at the U.S. Census Bureau that are not publicly available. These results have been
reviewed by the Census to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
Sincerely,
Vincent Sterk
Associate Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
University College London
v.sterk@ucl.ac.uk

Page 4 of 107

The Nature of Firm Growth
By Vincent Sterk r Petr Sedláček r Benjamin Pugsley∗
About half of all startups fail within five years, and those that
survive grow at vastly different speeds. Using Census microdata,
we estimate that most of these differences are determined by exante heterogeneity rather than persistent ex-post shocks. Embedding such heterogeneity in a firm dynamics model shows that the
presence of ex-ante heterogeneity (i) is a key determinant of the
firm size distribution and firm dynamics, (ii) can strongly affect
the macroeconomic effects of firm-level frictions, and (iii) helps
understand the recently documented decline in business dynamism
by showing a disappearance of high-growth startups (“gazelles”)
since the mid-1980s.
JEL: D22, E23, E24
Keywords: Firm Dynamics, Startups, Macroeconomics, Administrative Data
There are enormous differences across firms. On the one hand, many startups
fail within the first year and most of those that survive do not grow. On the
other hand, a small fraction of high-growth startups, so called “gazelles”, makes
lasting contributions to aggregate job creation and productivity growth (see e.g.
John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Robert Kulick and Javier Miranda, 2016). While
firm dynamics have long been recognized as a key determinant of macroeconomic
outcomes, little is known about why firm performance is so different or how the
nature of firm growth affects macroeconomic outcomes.
One view in the literature is that, following entry, firms are hit by ex-post shocks
to productivity or demand: some startups are lucky and grow into large firms.
An alternative view is that there are ex-ante differences across firms: some types
of startups are poised for growth, for example due to a highly scalable technology
or business idea.1
∗ Sterk: University College London and CEPR, v.sterk@ucl.ac.uk. Sedláček: University of Oxford
and CEPR, petr.sedlacek@economics.ox.ac.uk. Pugsley: University of Notre Dame, bpugsley@nd.edu.
First version December 2017. We thank Costas Arkolakis, Eric Bartelsman, Christian Bayer, Mark Bils,
Richard Blundell, Vasco Carvalho, Steven Davis, Pablo D’Erasmo, Chris Edmond, Doireann Fitzgerald,
Xavier Gabaix, Urban Jermann, Greg Kaplan, Pawel Krowlikowski, Erzo Luttmer, Ezra Oberfield, Vasia
Panousi, Fabien Postel-Vinay, Michael Siemer, Kjetil Storesletten, Emily and Robert Swift as well as
the editor, three anonymous referees, and participants of numerous seminar and conference presentations
for their helpful comments. We also are grateful for expert research assistance by Harry Wheeler and
Lan Dinh. Pugsley gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Sedláček gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Commission: this project
has received funding from the European Research Council [grant number 802145]. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed.
1 Another important dimension of heterogeneity, on which we do not focus in this paper, relates to
the role of supply versus demand factors. For evidence on this, see e.g. Colin Hottman, Stephen Redding

1

Page 5 of 107

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

In this paper, we provide empirical evidence on the relative importance of exante and ex-post heterogeneity in shaping firms’ growth paths. We then bring
this evidence to a structural firm dynamics model and show that the precise
nature of firm growth has strong implications for the macroeconomy and the
way in which it is affected by firm-level frictions. Since Hugo Hopenhayn and
Richard Rogerson (1993), a growing literature uses quantitative heterogeneousfirms models to evaluate the micro- and macro-economic effects of policies and/or
frictions. Our results demonstrate the importance of accounting carefully not only
for the amount of heterogeneity across firms, but also for its transience and for
the moment of its inception, i.e. before or after startup.
To establish these results, we make use of the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD), an administrative panel covering nearly all private employers in the United
States from 1976 to 2012. Our central piece of empirical evidence is the crosssectional autocovariance function of business-level employment by age. We thereby
take inspiration from the earnings dynamics literature, which has long recognized
that autocovariances help to distinguish shocks from deterministic profiles (see
e.g. Thomas MaCurdy, 1982; John Abowd and David Card, 1989; Fatih Guvenen, 2009; Fatih Guvenen and Anthony Smith, 2014). To the best of our knowledge, even the basic autocovariance structure of employment by age has not been
systematically documented in the firm dynamics literature which, instead, has
focused on the age profiles of average size and exit.2
We begin the analysis using a reduced-form statistical model of firm-level employment, which allows for the possibility that differences across businesses are a
result of both ex-ante heterogeneous growth profiles and ex-post shocks. A major benefit of the statistical model is its simplicity, yielding analytical formulas
which help to understand the identification of the key parameters. In particular,
it makes clear that crucial information about the extent of ex-ante heterogeneity
across firms is contained in the long-horizon autocovariances of firm-level employment.
Estimation of the statistical model on the autocovariance matrix reveals a key
finding of our study: ex-ante heterogeneity accounts for a large share of the
cross-sectional dispersion in employment. In the first year after entry, ex-ante
heterogeneity accounts for more than ninety percent of the cross-sectional dispersion in employment. More importantly, even after twenty years, ex-ante factors
still explain about forty percent of the cohort’s employment dispersion. This finding is consistent with empirical evidence that certain observable characteristics at
the time of startup can partly predict firm growth, see Jorge Guzman and Scott
Stern (2015), Sharon Belenzon, Aaron Chatterji and Brendan Daley (2017), Jorge
Guzman and Scott Stern (2019), and Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern (forthcoming). Beyond its value summarizing the importance of ex-ante heterogeneity for
and David Weinstein (2016) and Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger and Chad Syverson (2016).
2 See e.g. John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda (2013), Chiang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J.
Klenow (2014) and Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp and Michael Peters (2017). Luı́s Cabral and José Mata
(2003) also document the evolution of the skewness of the size distribution with age.

