Digitization and Pre-Purchase Information: The Causal and
Welfare Impacts of Reviews and Crowd Ratings
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0153.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: L15, L81

Page 1 of 43

Page 2 of 43

Disclosure Statement - Joel Waldfogel
No external financial support was obtained for this research. The authors have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Page 3 of 43

Digitization and Pre-Purchase Information: The Causal
and Welfare Impacts of Reviews and Crowd Ratings
By Imke Reimers and Joel Waldfogel*
Digitization has led to many new creative products, straining the
capacity of professional critics and consumers. Yet, the digitization of retailing has also delivered new crowd-based sources of
pre-purchase information. We compare the relative impacts of
professional critics and crowd-based Amazon star ratings on consumer welfare in book publishing. Using various fixed effects and
discontinuity-based empirical strategies, we estimate their causal
impacts on sales. We use these causal estimates to calibrate a
structural demand model. The aggregate effect of star ratings on
consumer surplus is, in our baseline estimates, more than ten
times the effect of traditional review outlets.
JEL: L15, L81
When choosing among experience goods, consumers benefit from guidance prior
to purchase. Traditionally, professional critics – such as product reviewers in
prominent media outlets – played important roles in providing this guidance.1
One of digitization’s many impacts has been a sharp increase in the number of
new creative products. While the number of new products has always exceeded
the capacity of professionals to review them, this gap has only grown with digitization.2 Crowd-based ratings – such as Amazon stars – on the other hand, are
available for essentially all products, raising the possibility that another facet of
digitization, ubiquitous crowd ratings, can provide information that allows the
realization of welfare gains from new products.
These considerations raise the question of how the new crowd-based pre-purchase
information made available by digitization affects purchase behavior and, by extension, welfare. To address this, we ask the following specific questions. First,
do professional reviews and crowd ratings have causal impacts on demand; and if
so, how large are these impacts? Second, how do the two pre-purchase information institutions – professional reviews and crowd ratings – affect the welfare of
* Reimers: Department of Economics, Northeastern University (email: i.reimers@northeastern.edu).
Waldfogel: Carlson School of Management and Department of Economics, University of Minnesota,
NBER, and ZEW (email: jwaldfog@umn.edu). We are grateful to seminar and conference participants
at Chapman University, Cornell University, the University of Georgia, the University of Gießen, the
University of Luxembourg, the University of Minnesota, the NBER Summer Institute, the National
Taiwan University, Northeastern University, the Pennsylvania State University, Queens University, Tel
Aviv University, Toulouse School of Economics, ZEW, and the University of Zurich. We thank Judith
Chevalier, Christian Helmers and Maria Ana Vitorino, as well as the referees and editor, for comments.
1 See Deutschman (2004), Pompeo (2017), or Martin (2011) for descriptions of various professional
critics and their influence on product markets.
2 See Waldfogel (2017) for evidence on the growth in new products. In 2014 New York Times film
critic Manohla Dargis implored the film industry to make fewer movies. See Dargis (2014).

1

Page 4 of 43

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

consumers? Finally, has the growth of crowd-based rating systems reduced the
influence of professional reviews?
We address these questions in the book market, which provides an auspicious
study context for a few reasons. First, books are experience goods, so that prepurchase information is especially useful. Second, the number of professional
reviews, and particularly the number appearing in highly visible outlets, is relatively small and therefore feasible to observe and quantify. Third, and perhaps
most important, we have high-frequency data on book demand at Amazon –
which accounts for about 45 percent of the US physical book market – that helps
identify causal relationships.3 We have daily measures of Amazon sales ranks
and their crowd-based star ratings, for 21,546 editions (from 10,641 titles) selling
during 2018, for three English-language Amazon sales domains (the US, Canada,
and the UK).
Reviews and star ratings are inherently endogenous, as raters and reviewers
decide whether and when to give feedback, in addition to what they write. More
appealing books sell more and receive more positive feedback. Our high-frequency
data from multiple platforms allow us to deal with this endogeneity using two
strategies, one for professional reviews and one for star ratings. We treat the appearance of a professional review as a discontinuous jump in attention delivered
to the title, and we look for a corresponding jump in our daily sales measure.
We measure the impacts of star ratings with an approach in the spirit of Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006), employing both book fixed effects and cross-platform
intertemporal comparisons.
Our descriptive analysis gives us causal evidence on the links between prepurchase information – reviews and ratings – and sales ranks. Quantification of
the importance of these two mechanisms requires a framework for welfare analysis.
Our measured welfare effects of ratings and reviews allow the consumers’ ex ante
choice utilities – when consumers have limited pre-purchase information – to differ
from their ex post consumption utilities. Calculating welfare effects requires two
translational steps beyond the causal evidence. First, we transform effects of prepurchase information on sales ranks into effects on quantities. This allows the
calculation of the elasticities of quantity sold with respect to the Amazon price
and the star rating, as well as the percentage impacts of professional reviews on
sales. Second, we use our estimated elasticities to calibrate nested logit (and
Marshallian) models of demand that facilitate welfare analysis. We also support
our interpretation of pre-purchase information with evidence, from individuals’
Amazon book ratings, that consumers who buy professionally reviewed titles enjoy
them.
We have four broad findings. First, professional review outlets, notably the
New York Times, have clear impacts on sales. In the five days following a New
York Times review, a book’s estimated sales improve by 55 percent. Sales for
3 See
https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/financial-reporting/
article/78929-print-unit-sales-increased-1-3-in-2018.html.

Page 5 of 43

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

WELFARE EFFECTS OF PRE-PURCHASE INFORMATION

3

this time interval improve by roughly 80 percent if the book is not only reviewed
but also “recommended” by the New York Times. Over the entire year, a New
York Times review raises sales by 2.8 percent. Second, the crowd also has clear
effects on sales: The elasticity of sales with respect to Amazon stars averages
0.63, and it is larger when the stars are based on more underlying ratings. Third,
per title, the effects of professional reviews are about twice as large as the effects
of star ratings; but in the aggregate, professional reviews raise consumer surplus
by $3.18 million while the aggregate effect of Amazon star ratings ($35.83 million
using our baseline approach) is over ten times larger. Despite operating only on
the Amazon platform, which is just under half of the book market, effects of the
crowd dwarf professional review effects because star ratings are ubiquitous while
only a small share – a few percent of the thousands of books published per year
– have prominently visible professional reviews. While improved pre-purchase
information can affect welfare either by inducing substitution among products
or by expanding the market, the welfare gains we calculate arise almost entirely
from consumer substitution of better for worse books. Finally, we do not find
evidence of substitution between reviews and star ratings: The effect of a New
York Times review, in a supplementary analysis covering weekly sales from 2004
to 2018, has not waned with the growth of digitization.
We conclude that digitization has delivered not only a proliferation of new
products but also new information mechanisms that add substantially to the
value of the pre-purchase information available to consumers from traditional
review sources. These crowd-based reviews provide pre-purchase information on
essentially all products, including those in categories neglected by professional
critics, and they do so without undermining the effects of professional critics on
the books and genres professionals do cover.
The paper proceeds in eight sections. Section I provides background on the
book market, the evolution of the information environment with digitization, and
a discussion of the existing literature. Section II presents a simple theory of choice
with and without pre-purchase product information, which organizes our descriptive and welfare analyses. Section III describes our main data on Amazon sales
ranks, star ratings, and prices, as well as reviews in major newspapers. Section
IV presents our empirical strategies for measuring causal impacts of professional
reviews and star ratings on sales, as well as empirical estimates and translations
of these into effects on quantities sold. Section IV also provides evidence, from
a supplementary dataset on individual user star ratings (Ni, Li and McAuley,
2019), that consumers who buy professionally reviewed titles enjoy them. Section
V then turns to welfare analysis. Using structural demand models calibrated to
our causal quantity estimates, we measure the respective welfare gains arising
from Amazon star ratings and professional reviews. Section VI demonstrates the
robustness of our welfare results to an alternative, descriptive model of consumer
surplus as well as an alternative model of the pre-purchase information consumers
would have in the absence of digitization. Section VII examines the complemen-

