The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central Africa
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2018-0284.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: N37, I15, trust, medicine, colonialism, health, culture

Page 1 of 89

August 10, 2020

“The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central Africa”
I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.
We received financial support for the project from the Lab for Economic
Applications and Policy, the History Project, and the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET).
Best,

Sara Lowes

Page 2 of 89

August 10, 2020

“The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central Africa”
I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.
We received financial support for the project from the Lab for Economic
Applications and Policy, the History Project, and the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET).
Best,

Eduardo Montero

Page 3 of 89

The Legacy of Colonial Medicine in Central Africa*
Sara Lowes†

Eduardo Montero‡

UC San Diego and NBER

University of Michigan

11 December 2020

Abstract: Between 1921 and 1956, French colonial governments
organized medical campaigns to treat and prevent sleeping sickness.
Villagers were forcibly examined and injected with medications with
severe, sometimes fatal, side effects. We digitized thirty years of
archival records to document the locations of campaign visits at a
granular geographic level for five central African countries. We find
that greater campaign exposure reduces vaccination rates and trust
in medicine – as measured by willingness to consent to a blood test.
We examine relevance for present day health initiatives; World Bank
projects in the health sector are less successful in areas with greater
exposure.
Keywords: Trust, medicine, colonialism, health, vaccinations, culture.
JEL Classification: N37, I15, I18, O55, Z1.

* We thank Marcella Alsan, Julia Cagé, Arun Chandrasekhar, Melissa Dell, James Feigenbaum, Claudia Goldin,
Casper Worm Hansen, Daniel Headrick, Richard Hornbeck, Guillaume Lachenal, Nathan Nunn, Nancy Qian, James
A. Robinson, Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, Marlous van Waijenburg, and Marianne Wanamaker for excellent feedback.
We are grateful for financial support from the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy, the History Project, and
the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET). We also thank Marcella Alsan and Marlous van Waijenburg for
generously sharing data with us, Jacques Pépin and Guillaume Lachenal for kindly guiding us in our search for data,
and Delphine Rouillard for her invaluable assistance at the archives. We thank the editor, Esther Duflo, and our
referees for thoughtful comments and guidance.
† UC San Diego, NBER, and CIFAR. Email: slowes@ucsd.edu. Website: www.saralowes.com.
‡ University of Michigan. Email: emontero@umich.edu. Website: www.eduardo-montero.com.

Page 4 of 89

1. Introduction
Between the 1920s and 1950s, French colonial governments undertook extensive medical campaigns in sub-Saharan Africa aimed at managing tropical diseases. In Cameroon and former
French Equatorial Africa (present day Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo, and
Gabon, henceforth AEF; see Figure 1 for a map), the colonial governments organized campaigns
against a variety of diseases, including sleeping sickness, leprosy, yaws, syphilis, and malaria.1
The most extensive of these campaigns focused on sleeping sickness, a lethal disease spread by the
tsetse fly. Over the course of several decades, millions of individuals were subjected to medical
examinations and forced to receive injections of medications with dubious efficacy and with
serious side effects, including blindness, gangrene, and death. The sleeping sickness campaigns
constituted some of the largest colonial health investments, and for many, these campaigns were
their first exposure to modern medicine (Headrick, 1994; Lachenal, 2014).
There is a large body of anecdotal evidence from Africa of mistrust in medicine leading to
under-utilization of health care.2 Relatedly, research in developing countries has highlighted that
even when there is access to high-quality preventative and therapeutic tools, demand remains
puzzling low (Dupas, 2011; Dupas and Miguel, 2017; Banerjee et al., 2010). Motivated by work
from anthropology and history which links colonial medical campaigns against sleeping sickness
and mistrust in medicine (Feldman-Savelsberg et al., 2000; Lachenal, 2014), we hypothesize that
the colonial medical campaigns may have had a series of unintended effects on both beliefs about
modern medicine and the success of modern health interventions. The campaigns may have
affected use of medicine because villagers were forced to receive injections, many of the medications had serious negative side effects, and the medications were ineffective. Additionally, the
campaigns may have caused the spread of contagious diseases because of the reuse of unsanitary
needles during the campaigns (Pépin, 2011; Lachenal, 2014). Thus, we examine the effects of
historical colonial medical campaigns on present day vaccination rates, trust in medicine, and the
success of World Bank health projects.
To measure exposure to colonial medical campaigns, we construct a novel data set from over
1 Yaws is a skin infection caused by a sub-species of the bacterium that causes venereal syphilis.
2 For example, during the 2019 Ebola outbreak in eastern Congo and the 2014 outbreak in West Africa, distrust
of medical workers was cited as a barrier to effective containment (Vinck et al., 2019; Blair et al., forthcoming). In
northern Nigeria, communities boycotted the polio vaccination leading to a large outbreak of a nearly eradicated
disease (Jegede, 2007).

1

Page 5 of 89

30 years of archival data from French military archives for five countries. We digitized hundreds
of tables documenting the locations of sleeping sickness campaign visits at a granular geographic
level – either the ethnicity-district or the sub-district level – between 1921 and 1956. Our measure
of exposure to the medical campaigns is the share of years that a location is visited during the
years of the campaigns.
We focus on two key outcomes. First, we examine vaccination rates using data from the
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) for our sample countries. Vaccinations are an important
and effective tool for preventing many diseases. Despite this, an estimated 20 million children
are at risk of vaccine-preventable diseases because they are not vaccinated (WHO, 2019). In our
area of interest, vaccination rates are low, often below herd immunity rates. We construct a
vaccination index, which is the share of completed vaccines of nine possible vaccines for children
under five.3 We find that greater exposure to the campaigns is associated with lower vaccination
rates for children. Being visited for 15 years, the average number of years an area is visited, is
associated with a 5.8 percentage point decrease in the vaccination index relative to a mean of
having completed about half of the nine vaccinations.
We then examine a potential proxy for trust in medicine. We measure trust in medicine by
whether an individual consents to a free and non-invasive blood test for either anemia or HIV in
the DHS. We consider consent to the blood tests to be a revealed preference measure of trust.4
We find that increased exposure to colonial medical campaigns is correlated with lower levels of
trust in medicine today. Approximately 4.8% of the sample refuse the blood tests. Being visited
by the colonial medical campaigns for 15 years increases refusals by 5.4 percentage points. The
strong correlation remains when we examine anemia blood test refusals or HIV blood test refusals
separately. We also discuss alternative interpretations of the blood test refusal measure.
The results are robust to a variety of geographic, colonial, pre-colonial, and individual level
controls. In our baseline set of covariates we include controls for geographic and historical characteristics, such as temperature, precipitation, land suitability, suitability for malaria, tsetse fly
suitability, initial measures of sleeping sickness prevalence, exposure to the Atlantic slave trade,
and exposure to missionaries. We also present results with contemporary controls, including
educational attainment and wealth fixed effects.
3 The vaccines that the DHS reports on are: polio 0, bcg, dpt 1, polio 1, dpt 2, polio 2, dpt 3, polio 3, and measles.
4 The DHS does not collect any survey measures of trust in medicine.

2

