What Motivates Paternalism? An Experimental Study
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1039.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: Paternalism, Welfare Economics, Experiment

Page 1 of 97

Stanford, 8/25/2020
Disclosure Statement
Paper: “What Motivates Paternalism? An Experimental Study"
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to
the research described in this paper.
For the collection of the data, we have obtained a Research Ethics Board
(IRB) approval at the University of Toronto (protocol 10279).

B. Douglas Bernheim

Page 2 of 97

Cologne, 8/25/2019
Disclosure Statement
Paper: “What Motivates Paternalism? An Experimental Study "
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to
the research described in this paper.
For the collection of the data, we have obtained a Research Ethics Board
(IRB) approval at the University of Toronto (protocol 10279).

Page 3 of 97

Zurich, 8/25/2020
Disclosure Statement
Paper: “What Motivates Paternalism? An Experimental Study "
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to
the research described in this paper.
For the collection of the data, we have obtained a Research Ethics Board
(IRB) approval at the University of Toronto (protocol 10279).

Sandro Ambuehl

Page 4 of 97

What Motivates Paternalism?
An Experimental Study
Sandro Ambuehl, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Axel Ockenfels⇤
August 27, 2020

Abstract
We study experimentally when, why, and how people intervene in others’ choices. Choice Architects
(CAs) construct opportunity sets containing bundles of time-indexed payments for Choosers. CAs frequently prevent impatient choices despite opportunities to provide advice, believing Choosers benefit.
They violate common behavioral welfare criteria by removing impatient options even when all payo↵s
are delayed. CAs intervene not by removing options they wish they could resist when choosing for themselves (mistakes-projective paternalism), but rather as if they seek to align others’ choices with their
own aspirations (ideals-projective paternalism). Laboratory choices predict subjects’ support for actual
paternalistic policies.

⇤
Ambuehl:
University of Zurich, Department of Economics, Blüemlisalpstrasse 10, 8006 Zürich, Switzerland, sandro.ambuehl@econ.uzh.ch. Bernheim: Stanford University, Department of Economics, 579 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA,
bernheim@stanford.edu. Ockenfels: University of Cologne, Department of Economics, Universitätsstrasse 22a, 50923 Cologne, Germany, ockenfels@uni-koeln.de. This paper previously circulated under the title “Projective Paternalism.” We thank the editor, Stefano
DellaVigna, as well as three anonymous referees, Joshua Knobe, Yoram Halevy, Armin Falk, Glenn W. Harrison, Kiryl Khalmetski,
Frank Schilbach, Cass Sunstein, Dmitry Taubinsky, Stefan Trautmann, and seminar and conference audiences in Berkeley, Copenhagen,
Cork, Cornell, Heidelberg, Innsbruck, Nijmegen, NYU, Stanford, Toronto, and Zurich for helpful comments and discussions. Max Rainer
Pascal Grossmann and Yero Samuel Ndiaye provided excellent research assistance. Ambuehl gratefully acknowledges support through
a University of Toronto Connaught New Researcher Award and the University of Toronto Scarborough Wynne and Bertil Plumptre
Fellowship. Parts of this paper were written while Ambuehl visited the briq Institute in Bonn. This research has been approved by
the University of Toronto Research Ethics Board (protocol 10279). Ambuehl and Bernheim gratefully acknowledge funding from the
Alfred P. Sloan foundation (grant number G-2017-9017). Ambuehl and Ockenfels gratefully acknowledge funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 741409);
the results reflect only the authors’ views; the ERC is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.
Ockenfels gratefully acknowledges funding by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC
2126/1-390838866).

Page 5 of 97

Normative discussions of paternalism have featured in economics, philosophy, and public policy for centuries (Locke, 1764; Mill, 1869; Thaler and Sunstein, 2003). A wide range of government regulations, such
as retirement savings mandates, restrictions on payday loans and investment products, various forms of
consumer protection, the criminalization of suicide, and legal doctrines concerning undue inducement and
unconscionability all address paternalistic concerns (Dworkin, 1971; Zamir, 1998). Paternalistically motivated social programs play a large role in the U.S. economy (Mulligan and Philipson, 2000; Moffitt, 2003;
Currie and Gahvari, 2008), and in some instances even the business models of private companies are paternalistically motivated.1 Despite the prevalence of paternalism, a positive investigation of the phenomenon
is largely lacking. Significantly, paternalistic decision making often falls to voters (Faravelli et al., 2015),
low-level government officials (Moffitt, 2006), and managers of private firms, rather than to experts, omniscient benevolent planners (Besley, 1988), or despotic autocrats (Glaeser, 2005). A large body of research
catalogues the fallibility of human judgment when people choose for themselves (Kahneman, 2011). It is
reasonable to assume that normative judgments that guide paternalism are also susceptible to systematic
confusion or bias (Rizzo and Whitman, 2019).
This paper studies experimentally when, why, and how people act paternalistically. These questions are
difficult to address in naturally occurring contexts because real-world policies with paternalistic elements
generally implicate non-paternalistic concerns, such as externalities, and in any event people usually disagree
about their efficacy. Conducting a laboratory experiment allows us to remove extraneous factors and study
paternalistic behavior in isolation. In order to demonstrate external validity, we show that our main results
extend to subjects’ assessments of real-world paternalistic policies, and that these assessments are directly
related to subjects’ decisions within the experiment.
Subjects in the role of Choice Architects construct choice sets that determine the opportunities available
to others in the role of Choosers. Each choice option consists of two payments, one received the day of
the experiment (“sooner”) and the other received half a year later (“later”). Impatience is costly: larger
earlier payments are associated with smaller total payments. We employ the intertemporal choice domain
because of its central importance across all of economics, because of ex ante reasons to believe that certain
choices would meet with disapproval, and because it allows us to examine normative judgments that feature
prominently in applications of behavioral welfare economics, including in a substantial and rapidly expanding
literature (reviewed in Bernheim and Taubinsky, 2018) that argues for a wide range of paternalistic policies.
In the first part of our analysis, we show that Choice Architects frequently choose to restrict others’
choice options, then we establish several fact patterns that shed light on their motivations. Significantly,
subjects frequently withhold options from Choosers despite ample opportunities to provide advice. The
typical intervention requires the Chooser to exercise a minimum level of patience. For instance, when
the available options include receiving D0 sooner and D15 later, 15% of Choice Architects withhold the
1
The Vanguard Group, for instance, argues that financial advisors should attempt to help clients by “providing discipline and reason
to clients who are often undisciplined and emotional” and that they “can act as emotional circuit breakers ... by circumventing their
clients’ tendencies” (Bennyho↵ and Kinniry Jr, 2011).

1

