Politically feasible reforms of non-linear tax systems
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0021.R3
Manuscript Type: Administrator
Keywords: Non-linear income taxation, Tax reforms, Political economy

Page 1 of 133

Disclosure statement
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper
Königswinter, April 14, 2020

Felix Bierbrauer

Page 2 of 133

Disclosure statement
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper “Politically feasible reforms of non-linear tax systems”
Paris, July 8, 2020
Pierre Boyer

Page 3 of 133

Disclosure statement
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper
Munich, April 14, 2020

Andreas Peichl

Page 4 of 133

American Economic Association
Data and Code Archive Agreement
Author Name (printed):
Manuscript Title:

Felix Bierbrauer

Politically Feasible Reforms of Non-Linear Tax Systems

WHEREAS, the above-named Author has submitted the above-referenced manuscript (“Manuscript”) to the
American Economic Association (“Association”) for consideration for publication; and
WHEREAS, in order to consider the Manuscript for publication, Association requires Author to deliver ­certain data,
software, and any related software documentation that accompany the Manuscript (“Archive”) to a t­hird-party
repository (“Repository”) in accordance with Association’s Data and Code Availability Policy and to make the
Archive available to Association for review and replication of Author’s findings;
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the opportunity for publication of the Manuscript with Association,
­Author and Association agree as follows:
	1. Author hereby grants to Association a non-exclusive, perpetual, irrevocable, and royalty-free license to
reproduce and use the software that is part of the Archive (the “Software”) in order to ­replicate ­Author’s
findings and otherwise in order to exercise Association’s rights under this Agreement and any agreement
­between the parties to publish the Manuscript (a “Publication Agreement”). Author r­epresents and warrants
that Author has the right to grant this license and that Author has obtained any necessary licenses which
include the right of sublicense from any third parties who own any part of the Software in order to grant this
license. Author further represents and warrants that Author has complied and will comply with all relevant laws
and regulations (“Laws”) with respect to the Archive, including but not ­limited to any Laws relating to the use
and disclosure of personal, sensitive, or proprietary data (collectively, “Data”). Author represents and warrants
that Author has obtained all necessary consents and licenses from any third parties to include the Data in the
Archive and to make such Data accessible through the Repository as set forth herein.
	2. Author shall reimburse Association for any damages, losses, fines, or other costs incurred, including
­attorney’s fees, as a result of a claim by a third party arising from or relating to a breach by Author of any of
the representations or warranties provided herein (“Claim”) that results in any judgment against Association.
Association shall notify Author of any such Claim and shall provide Author with the opportunity to participate
in the defense of such Claim, at Author’s expense.
	3. Author agrees to allow the Archive to be shared from the Repository with Association within a r­ easonable
time after delivery to the Repository. Association has no obligation to publish the M
­ anuscript, but in any case
­ elivered
will not publish the Manuscript until it has had the opportunity to review and test the ­Archive as d
to the Repository. If the Data is subject to any access restriction that prevents ­Author from d
­ epositing the
­ nder what conditions an
files in a Repository, Author shall provide detailed information on how, where, and u
­independent researcher can access the Data. All Software shall still be ­provided. Association shall provide
notice to Author or Author’s designee when the Archive has been approved, or not been approved. If the
­Archive has not been approved, Association will provide information as to the reasons for the non-approval
and provide Author with a reasonable opportunity to make corrections.

1 of 2

Page 5 of 133

American Economic Association
Data and Code Archive Agreement
	4. If Association chooses to publish the Manuscript, then upon publication of the Manuscript, Author shall
ensure that the Archive shall be made available and will continue to be made available to users in the ­public
(“Users”) via an open license or licenses (“Open License”) sufficient to allow the User to ­replicate the ­research
findings, and that Author shall not attempt to terminate the Open License as to any User w
­ ithout ­express
­permission from Association. Association prefers the latest version of the Creative Commons ­Attribution
­CC-BY for the licensing of Data, and in any case an Open License that does not impose restrictions other
than ­attribution. Association prefers the Modified BSD license for the licensing of Software.
	5. Governing Law. This Agreement is governed by the laws of the State of Tennessee, and by any ­federal
laws which may apply, including but not limited to copyright law. Any dispute between the parties which
­cannot be resolved by informal means shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state and federal
courts located in Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
	6. Entire Agreement. This Agreement supersedes all other prior discussions and agreements between the
parties, written and oral, and constitutes a complete and exclusive statement of the terms of the ­agreement
between the parties and no changes, amendments, or revisions to these terms shall be ­binding unless
­expressly confirmed in writing by an authorized representative of each party.

Assignor
Author Signature: Felix Bierbrauer
Date:

Digital unterschrieben von Felix Bierbrauer
Datum: 2020.07.13 13:13:26 +02'00'

July 13, 2020

Association
Signature:
Name (printed):
Title:
Date:

2 of 2

