The Financial Transmission of Housing Booms: Evidence
from Spain
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1410.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: Housing Boom, Credit, Financial Transmission

Page 1 of 74

Disclosure statement for “The Financial Transmission of Housing Booms: Evidence from Spain”,
Alberto Martín

Senior Adviser, European Central Bank
Senior Researcher, CREI
Adjunct Professor, Pompeu Fabra University

European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse, 20
60314 Frankfurt, Germany

September 24, 2020

Disclosure of financial interest
During the period of research for this paper, I acknowledge financial support from the following
entities:
•
•
•
•
•

The ERC (Consolidator Grant FP7-615651-MacroColl)
The Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness (grant ECO2016-79823-P).
The Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa
Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563).
The CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya, from the Generalitat de Catalunya (grant
2014SGR-830 AGAUR)
The Barcelona GSE Research Network.

I have no additional financial interests to declare.
Alberto Martín

Page 2 of 74

Disclosure statement for “The Financial Transmission of Housing Booms: Evidence from Spain”,
Enrique Moral-Benito

Division Head, Bank of Spain
Calle de Alcalá 48
28014 Madrid, Spain

September 24, 2020

Disclosure of financial interest

I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper.

Enrique Moral-Benito

Page 3 of 74

Disclosure statement for “The Financial Transmission of Housing Booms: Evidence from Spain”,
Tom Schmitz

Assistant Professor of Economics
Bocconi University
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano, Italy

September 24, 2020

Disclosure of financial interest

I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper.

Tom Schmitz

Page 4 of 74

The Financial Transmission of Housing Booms:
Evidence from Spain
Alberto Martín, Enrique Moral-Benito, and Tom Schmitz∗
September 24, 2020

Abstract
How does a housing boom affect credit to non-housing firms? Using bank, firm and loan-level microdata, we show that the Spanish housing boom reduced non-housing credit growth during its first years, but
stimulated it later on. These patterns can be rationalized by financial constraints for banks. Constrained
banks initially accommodated higher housing credit demand by reducing non-housing credit. Eventually,
however, the housing boom increased bank net worth and expanded credit supply. A quantitative model,
disciplined by our cross-sectional estimates, indicates that the crowding-out effect was substantial but
temporary, and had been fully absorbed by the end of the boom. JEL: E32, E44, G21.

During the last two decades, many countries (including the United States, China, the United Kingdom, Spain
and Ireland) experienced large run-ups in house prices. These housing booms are widely believed to have had
important spillovers on the non-housing sector, and understanding their transmission channels has become a
key concern for economists and policymakers (see Zhu, 2014 and Jordà et al., 2015).
∗ Martín: European Central Bank, Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional, and Barcelona GSE, Ramon Trias Fargas
25-27, 08005 Barcelona, Spain. Email: amartin@crei.cat. Moral-Benito: Bank of Spain, Calle de Alcalá 48, 28014 Madrid,
Spain. Email: enrique.moral@gmail.com. Schmitz: Bocconi University and IGIER, Via Roentgen 1, 20136 Milan, Italy. Email:
tom.schmitz@unibocconi.it. We thank Sandra Daudignon, Wolfram Horn, Ilja Kantorovitch and Jörn Onken for excellent
research assistance. We also thank Manuel Adelino, Vasco Carvalho, Filippo De Marco, Manuel García-Santana, Nicola Gennaioli, Thomas Le Barbanchon, Tim Lee, Jorge Martinez-Pages, Ander Perez-Orive, Alexander Popov, Nicolas Serrano-Velarde,
Tomás Williams, and seminar participants at Bocconi, Bank of Spain, Stanford, University of Washington, University of British
Columbia, the “XXI Workshop in International Economics and Finance” at Banco de Mexico, the “Housing, Urban Development,
and the Macroeconomy” conference at USC Dornsife INET, the 4th Mannheim Workshop in Quantitative Macroeconomics, the
2018 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2018 Annual Meeting of the SED, the 2018 Wharton
Liquidity and Financial Fragility Conference, the 2019 T2M Conference and the 2019 AREUEA International Conference for
helpful comments. A previous version of this paper was titled “The Financial Transmission of Housing Bubbles: Evidence from
Spain”. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Spain or the
European Central Bank. Martín acknowledges support from the ERC (Consolidator Grant FP7-615651-MacroColl), from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness (grant ECO2016-79823-P) from the Spanish Ministry of Economy
and Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563), from the
CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya, from the Generalitat de Catalunya (grant 2017SGR-1393 AGAUR), and from
the Barcelona GSE Research Network.

1

Page 5 of 74

In this paper, we analyze the role of banks for the transmission of housing booms. Despite its economic
importance, the role of the banking system as a transmission channel is a priori unclear. On the one
hand, some studies argue that housing booms crowd out credit to firms in the non-housing sector, as banks
reallocate credit to mortgages, real estate and construction firms (e.g., Chakraborty et al., 2018; Hau and
Ouyang, 2018). On the other hand, there is also evidence that housing booms stimulate credit growth for all
sectors of the economy (e.g., Chaney et al., 2012; Jiménez et al., 2019).
Using bank, firm and loan-level microdata, we show that both effects operated during the Spanish housing
boom of the early 2000s. Crucially, however, their strength varied over time. In its first years, the housing
boom reduced credit growth for firms in the non-housing sector, but this eventually reverted and the boom
ended up increasing credit growth for firms in the non-housing sector. We argue that financial constraints for
banks can rationalize both the initial crowding-out effect and its later reversal, and provide empirical support
for this hypothesis. Finally, we use a calibrated model, partly disciplined by our cross-sectional empirical
estimates, to quantify the aggregate importance of financial transmission. We find that the Spanish housing
boom had a substantial crowding-out effect, but that this effect was short-lived and had been fully absorbed
by the end of the boom.
Spain’s housing boom was massive. Between 2000 and 2008, nominal house prices increased by 135%.
Real housing credit increased by 232% between 2000 and 2007, and the share of housing in overall credit
increased from 46.6% to 61.9% in the same time period.1 This makes Spain an ideal case study for the effects
of a housing boom on credit to firms in the non-housing sector.
For our analysis, we combine the Spanish Credit Registry (which contains virtually all bank loans to
firms) and the Commercial Registry (which contains balance sheet information on virtually all firms). Our
empirical strategy exploits bank and firm-level heterogeneity in exposure to the housing boom. We measure
a bank’s exposure by its share of credit allocated to housing in 2000. This reflects the idea that banks with
housing-centered business models or pre-existing ties to housing were more affected by the boom. We restrict
our firm sample to non-housing firms (firms that operate neither in the construction nor in the real estate
sector), and measure firm exposure as a weighted average of the exposure of the banks a firm borrows from.
Using this dataset, we first regress loan-level credit growth (i.e., credit growth for any bank-firm pair) on
bank exposure to the housing boom. Following Khwaja and Mian (2008), we use firm fixed effects to control
for firm-level credit demand shocks. Thus, coefficients are identified by differences in the credit growth of the
same non-housing firm at banks with different levels of exposure to the boom. We find that for the average
1 Section 1.1 lists the sources for these figures and provides further background information on the Spanish housing boom.

2

