Persistent Political Engagement: Social Interactions and the
Dynamics of Protest Movements
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0261.R3
Manuscript Type: Regular Submission - High Income Country - Member
Date Submitted by the
23-Sep-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Bursztyn, Leonardo; University of Chicago, Economics
Cantoni, Davide; Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen, Economics;
Yang, David; Harvard University, Department of Economics
Yuchtman, Noam; The London School of Economics and Political Science
Department of Management
Zhang, Y. Jane; University of New South Wales
Keywords: D74, P00, Political movements, social interactions

Page 1 of 105

Persistent Political Engagement:
Social Interactions and the Dynamics of Protest Movements
Leonardo Bursztyn
Davide Cantoni
David Y. Yang
Noam Yuchtman
Y. Jane Zhang*
September 2020

Abstract
We study the causes of sustained participation in political movements. To identify the persistent effect of protest participation, we randomly, indirectly incentivize Hong Kong university students into participation in an antiauthoritarian protest. To identify the role of social
networks, we randomize this treatment’s intensity across major-cohort cells. We find that incentives to attend one protest within a political movement increase subsequent protest attendance, but only when a sufficient fraction of an individual’s social network is also incentivized
to attend the initial protest. One-time mobilization shocks have dynamic consequences, with
mobilization at the social network level important for sustained political engagement.
Keywords: Political movements, social interactions
JEL Classification: D74, P0

* Bursztyn: University of Chicago and NBER. Email: bursztyn@uchicago.edu. Cantoni: Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversität Munich, CEPR, and CESifo. Email: cantoni@lmu.de. Yang: Harvard University and NBER. Email:
davidyang@fas.harvard.edu. Yuchtman: LSE, NBER, CEPR, and CESifo. Email: n.yuchtman@lse.ac.uk. Zhang:
University of New South Wales. Email: jane.zhang@unsw.edu.au. Helpful and much appreciated suggestions, critiques and encouragement were provided by Dan Berkowitz, Andrei Shleifer, seminar participants at Amsterdam,
Cambridge, Columbia, Harvard, Heidelberg, IIES, Imperial, INSEAD, Mannheim, Northeastern, NUS, Oxford, Pompeu Fabra, Sussex, UC Berkeley, Yale, Zurich, and conference participants (ASSA, NBER SI, SITE, Bruneck, Munich).
Raymond Han, Moritz Leitner, Jackson Li, Glen Ng, Aakaash Rao, Vanessa Sticher, and Meggy Wan provided excellent research assistance. Cantoni acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement n. 716837). The research
described in this article was approved by the University of Munich IRB, protocol 2017-04; by the Stanford University
Institutional Review Board, Protocol 38481; and, by the University of California-Berkeley Committee for Protection of
Human Subjects, Protocol ID 2015-05-7571. For further details on IRB approvals please refer to Online Appendix B. The
experiment is registered on the AEA RCT registry with ID AEARCTR-0002301.

1

Page 2 of 105

Protests demanding political rights have been a critical driver of economic, social, and political
change for centuries (e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012, 2019; Aidt and Franck, 2015). While
dramatic, one-shot events capture public attention (e.g., the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, or
Tiananmen Square in 1989), political rights have historically often arisen from successful, longrunning movements: sequences of events in which sustained political engagement is important.
Historically important instances include the women’s suffrage movements, the US Civil Rights
movement, or the anti-Apartheid movement in South Africa.
Political movements have received an enormous amount of attention from across the social
sciences (e.g., Tilly, 1978; Skocpol, 1979; McAdam, 1982; Goldstone, 1991; Kuran, 1997). Existing work has argued for the importance of individuals’ sustained engagement, working through
social structures (Hirschman, 1984; McAdam, 1986; Tarrow, 2005).1 Up to now, however, there
does not exist well-identified, i.e., experimental or quasi-experimental, evidence on the causes of
individuals’ sustained participation in political movements.
Our paper provides the first such evidence. First, we identify the persistent effect of one’s own
protest participation by randomly, indirectly incentivizing Hong Kong university students into
participation in an antiauthoritarian protest. We do so by paying subjects for providing us with
information about protest crowd size; we thus do not pay for protest turnout per se, but behavior
conditional on turnout. This allows us to distinguish state dependence — the possibility that
participation in one protest causally affects subsequent participation — from serial correlation in
preferences.
We next test whether participation by one’s social network plays a causal role in shaping one’s
own persistent protest participation by randomizing the intensity of this treatment across majorcohort cells. Finally, we explore mechanisms through which changed social interactions may generate persistent participation. Given that protests are inherently group events (see, e.g., Passarelli
and Tabellini, 2017), we consider changes in friendships, which among other things can affect the
social utility arising from protest participation, or reduce coordination costs. We also examine
changes in preferences and beliefs (beliefs about the world or beliefs about others), as these are
central in many models of protest participation.2
Our context is Hong Kong’s ongoing antiauthoritarian movement, demanding political rights
from the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).3 We study participation in the July 1 marches, yearly
protests that represent an important component of Hong Kong’s ongoing antiauthoritarian movement. We study the 2017 and 2018 marches: these were peaceful, modestly-sized protests of
around 50,000 citizens, aiming both to achieve policy concessions and to signal the strength of
1 Studying participants in the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Summer project, McAdam (1986, p. 88) writes that, “a prior

history of activism and integration into supportive networks acts as the structural ‘pull’ that encourages the individual
to make good on his strongly held beliefs.”
2 E.g., Tullock (1971), Bueno de Mesquita (2010), Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2011), Edmond (2013), or Barberà and
Jackson (2019).
3 We thus contribute to a growing empirical literature on the political economy of popular dissent in the Greater
China region: e.g., Lorentzen (2013), Qin et al. (2017), King et al. (2013), and Zhang (2016).

1

Page 3 of 105

the movement.
Our study faces a crucial identification challenge: we need to observe both exogenous protest
participation at the individual level as well as independent exogenous variation in the protest
participation of an individual’s social network. We design a field experiment to overcome this
challenge, leveraging our online surveys with students at Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (HKUST; see Cantoni et al., 2016, 2019). The experiment involves two dimensions of
randomization: first, at the individual level, we randomly assign subjects to a condition in which
they are indirectly incentivized to attend the 2017 march. Second, to generate exogenous variation
in protest participation at the social network level, our design also randomly varies the proportion of treated individuals across major⇥cohort cells at 0%, 1%, 50%, or 75% treated. Importantly,
these are the only two dimensions of randomization implemented, and both are pre-registered.

We find two main results. First, individual incentives lead to an immediate (2017) increase
in protest turnout, and this effect does not vary with how many others in an individual’s social
network receive incentives. Second, protest participation remains persistently (in 2018) higher,
but only among treated individuals who are initially treated along with at least 50% of their
major⇥cohort cell. Thus, sustained participation in a political movement is not a result of self-

selection and serially correlated preferences alone, but is to some extent state-dependent. In addition, social networks play a crucial role in this state dependence. These results have important
implications for the evolution of political movements: a one-time mobilization shock will have dynamic consequences, with mobilization of social networks playing an important role in producing
sustained political engagement.
We consider several mechanisms through which changed social interactions may produce the
persistent protest participation we find among treated subjects in high treatment intensity cells.
We begin by presenting evidence that treated subjects in high treatment intensity cells form significantly more new and stronger friendships with people who are politically active — this could
directly increase the social utility from protest participation, and also increase turnout through
other channels. Consistent with changed social interactions reducing coordination costs, we find
that treated subjects in high treatment intensity cells are by a large margin the most likely to convert their protest plans into action. We next examine changes in individuals’ political preferences
and beliefs; while noisy estimates mean we cannot rule out some role for these channels, we do not
find compelling evidence that they drive the persistent protest participation we observe among
treated subjects in high treatment intensity cells.
Our results contribute to a growing empirical literature on the determinants of protest participation. Much of this work studies individuals’ participation in mass movements as a one-shot
action, and thus cannot shed light on the causes of persistent political engagement by individuals (e.g., Enikolopov et al., 2019, Manacorda and Tesei, 2019, González, 2019, Cantoni et al., 2019,
Hager et al., 2019b, and Hager et al., 2019a). Other work (in particular, Madestam et al., 2013, on
the Tea Party protests) identifies the spatial persistence of protests, but cannot isolate individual2

Page 4 of 105

level persistent behavior or identify its causes. We are able to unpack persistence that has been
observed in the aggregate, identifying individual-level persistent behavior that depends also on
the behavior of others in one’s social network.4
Our own previous work (Cantoni et al., 2019) finds that protest participation in the same Hong
Kong setting (although a previous protest) is a game of strategic substitutes. This finding occurs
within a single protest, when beliefs about the turnout of the broader HKUST student body and
the entire Hong Kong population are updated. In contrast to that work, we now study the influence of peers with whom one has relatively strong ties, in a dynamic setting. Our work suggests
that strong and weak ties may function differently (Granovetter, 1973): changes in the participation of the population at large will affect a subject’s beliefs about the likelihood a discrete public
good is produced, or that government crackdown may occur, potentially generating strategic substitutability. In contrast, friends’ participation will have a large effect on the social utility derived
from protest participation; on the coordination costs of attending; and on social image considerations, potentially generating strategic complementarity.

I

Experimental setting and design

I.A

Context: Hong Kong’s antiauthoritarian movement and the July 1 marches

In the July 1, 1997, “handover”, Hong Kong was transferred from its status as a British colony,
with limited democratic political rights but strong protections of civil liberties and respect for the
rule of law, to being a Special Administrative Region within the People’s Republic of China.5 The
political institutions of Hong Kong are defined by its quasi-constitution — the “Basic Law” — and
follow a policy known as “one country, two systems.”
The Basic Law left ambiguous several important dimensions that have been bargained over between the so-called “pan-democracy” and “pro-Beijing” camps since the handover. Every year, the
confrontation between Hong Kong citizens and the Chinese government culminates in a protest
march held on the anniversary of the “handover” on July 1. Those marches have achieved major
policy changes; turnout has varied significantly across years, from less than 20,000 to over 500,000.
The repeated nature of the July 1 marches — and their organizers’ interest in keeping up high rates
of repeated participation — is a feature that the Hong Kong antiauthoritarian protests share with
many other political movements.
Our experiment is embedded in the July 1 marches of 2017 and 2018. In both years, protest
4 Our work is conceptually related to studies of persistence and social influence in voting behavior (among others,
Gerber et al., 2008, Fujiwara et al., 2016, and DellaVigna et al., 2016), though the dynamics of repeated protest participation may be very different from repeated voting, and the public and social nature of protests may make the role of
social interactions distinct.
5 In Appendix A, we provide a richer description of the political background at the time of our experiment. Note that
the implementation on July 1, 2020, of a national security law passed in Beijing has the potential to alter Hong Kong’s
political landscape, though (as of August 2020) it is still too early for us to know exactly how.

3

Page 5 of 105

participation (around 50,000) was modest by historical standards.

I.B

Overview

Our experimental sample is drawn from among the undergraduate student body at Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology (HKUST). We recruit subjects through an email sent to the
entire HKUST undergraduate student body to participate in a yearly survey on students’ preferences (see Cantoni et al., 2016, 2019 for more details); the response rates have ranged between 10%
and 20%. The survey wave in June 2017 includes around 1,100 subjects. Follow-up emails were
subsequently sent to experimental subjects between July 2017 and July 2018.
A basic concern regarding self-reported political preferences and behavior is that subjects may
not report their participation truthfully. We do not believe that self-censorship is likely in the
context of our study. In prior research, we conducted list experiments (also known as the “item
count technique”) suggesting that subjects respond honestly to direct questions about sensitive
political topics (see Cantoni et al., 2019, for a discussion). More generally, we believe that subjects
would have reported their protest participation honestly given the fully legal, peaceful nature of
the 2017 and 2018 protests.
It is important to discuss the ethical considerations in conducting our study.6 Our research
design is based on a careful assessment of ethics. Here we briefly outline salient aspects: (i) IRB
approval was received for the study; (ii) no minors are able to participate in the study; (iii) ex ante,
we assessed a risk level that was minimal, i.e., not larger “than those ordinarily encountered in
daily life of the general population”: participation in the July 1 marches is unambiguously legal
and was peaceful in all years prior to the study; (iv) ex post, the assessed risk was minimal, as
the marches we studied remained peaceful with zero protesters charged for any offenses across
the two years studied; (v) our experiment is tiny relative to the size of the July 1 marches that we
study, with treatment affecting total turnout by roughly 0.1%.
The timeline of the experiment is as follows (see also Appendix Figure D.1):
• June 2017: Baseline survey and assignment of treatment. We elicit subjects’ own political preferences and beliefs, and beliefs about the political preferences and beliefs of others;
planned and past political behavior; and, we assign and implement the experimental treatment.
• July 2017: Effect on protest participation and short-run impacts on beliefs and preferences. We elicit participation in the 2017 march, as well as political preferences and beliefs
(short-run treatment effects). Measured beliefs and preferences capture potential mechanisms through which the individual-level or social network-level treatment can shape protest
turnout in 2018.
6 We provide a detailed discussion of ethics and our risk assessment in Appendix B. All experimental materials

(recruitment email, treatment prompts, full survey questions) are provided in Appendix C)

4

