Internal Deadlines, Drug Approvals, and Safety Problems
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0086.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
14-Aug-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Cohen, Lauren; Harvard Business School, Finance and Entrepreneurship
Gurun, Umit; University of Texas at Dallas, School of Management
Li, Danielle; Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of
Management,
Keywords: FDA, Drug Approvals, Desk Clearing, Adverse Effects, I18, M48

Page 1 of 46

Internal Deadlines, Drug Approvals,
and Safety Problems

Lauren Cohen

Umit G. Gurun

Danielle Li *

Harvard & NBER

University of Texas at Dallas

MIT & NBER

August 14, 2020

Abstract

Absent explicit quotas, incentives, reporting, or fiscal year-end motives, drug
approvals around the world surge in December, at month-ends, and before respective
major national holidays.
Drugs approved before these informal deadlines are
associated with significantly more adverse effects, including more hospitalizations,
life-threatening incidents, and deaths – particularly, drugs most rushed through the
approval process. These patterns are consistent with a model in which regulators
rush to meet internal production benchmarks associated with salient calendar
periods: this “desk-clearing” behavior results in more lax review, leading both to
increased
output
and
increased
safety
issues
at
particular—and
predictable—periodicities over the year.

* Contact information: Lauren Cohen, Harvard Business School, Telephone: (617) 495-3888. E-mail:
lcohen@hbs.edu; Umit G. Gurun, University of Texas at Dallas, Telephone: (972) 883-5917. E-mail:
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu; Danielle Li, MIT, Telephone: (617) 253-6618. E-mail: d li@mit.edu. We would
like thank Daniel Carpenter, Sabrina Howell, Aaron Kesselheim, Christopher Malloy, and seminar
participants at Harvard University and the 2020 American Economic Association meetings for helpful
comments and suggestions.

Page 2 of 46

In this paper we document a global surge in drug approvals preceding informal
deadlines. These include spikes in the month of December, at the end of each calendar
month, and just before important national holidays in respective countries. The magnitude
of these effects is striking: for instance, across a dataset spanning drug approvals in the
United States, European Union, Japan, China, and South Korea, 18.64% of all approved
drugs are approved in the month of December—more than double the average in any other
month. Moreover, we examine the safety ramifications of these approval surges. Holding
constant disease type, year, and various other controls, drugs approved just before informal
deadlines are associated with significantly more adverse effects, including more
hospitalizations, life-threatening incidents, and deaths.1
The approval patterns we observe exist at periodicities consistent with regulators rushing
to meet internally imposed benchmarks associated with calendar events such as year-ends,
month-ends, and holidays. In particular, while Carpenter, Zucker and Avorn (2008) have
shown that drug regulators rush to meet formal deadlines in the United States, we identify
a distinct behavioral phenomenon that persists across different formal regulatory regimes in
many countries. For example, drug regulators are not formally evaluated on their year-end
output in any country that we are aware of; rather, they are typically given target times for
processing applicants, and evaluated in part based on the percentage of applications that
receive a timely review. These specific targets differ across regulators in different countries
(within 300 days in the US versus 210 days in the EU, for instance). Rushing to comply with
these formal policies would not generate the pattern of year-end, month-end, and holiday
surges that we document.
We argue, instead, that these patterns are more consistent with an interpretation in
which regulators use salient calendar-time periods to clear their workloads so that they can
start with a “clean” desk in the next period. Consistent with this interpretation, we show
that regulators approve an especially large number of drugs in December in years when they
have approved relatively few drugs in the first part of the year. Moreover, December drugs
approved during these especially busy months are associated with even more adverse effects.
This suggests either that regulators engage in hastier desk-clearing when their workload
is high (e.g., when there are more drug candidates left to be decided upon in December)
1
We observe adverse effects data for the US and the EU; disaggregated data on serious adverse effects
are available from the US sample only.

1

Page 3 of 46

or when they feel greater informal pressure to increase output (e.g., when their approval
numbers look low leading into December).2
We provide evidence that our findings are not driven by a number of alternative
explanations. First, it is possible that regulatory bodies may evaluate different types of
drugs in December or at the end of each month. Regulators may, for instance, collect their
most complex cases throughout the year or month to be considered at the end of that
period. In this case, the higher adverse effects that we see for drugs approved during these
periods would reflect the nature of the drugs themselves rather than the quality of the
decision-making process that led to their approval. To explore this possibility, we examine
whether there are ex ante differences among drugs approved during output surges that may
explain their ex post differences in adverse effects. We show that controlling for a battery
of drug characteristics—the disease meant to be treated, market size, and the drug’s
priority review status—does not alter our findings, suggesting that our results are not
driven by differences on these dimensions. We further show that drugs approved in
December do not appear to be more complicated or difficult to review, as explicitly
measured by their chemical or functional novelty.
It is also possible that firms time application submissions in the hopes of receiving a
lax December review. Using information on application dates available for a subset of US
drugs, we find no evidence that the December effect is generated by strategic timing, which
would generate a surge of applications in February (for regular review) or a surge in June
(for priority review).
If regulators make rushed decisions to meet internal deadlines, a natural question is why
they seem to err on the side of approval rather than rejection. We believe this may be
the result of informal performance benchmarks that focus on the quantity of drugs that are
approved rather than the quality of those decisions. The number of drugs that are approved
is immediately visible and is likely to be much more salient than an approved drug’s adverse
effects, which may may take years to be realized. Indeed, in the public discourse, drug
regulators across the world are evaluated and compared on the basis of their drug output.
This, combined with the fact that industry and patient groups typically advocate for the
approval rather than rejection of new drugs, may bias regulators toward approval.
Finally we consider the policy implications of our findings. First, we note that the
the welfare implications of our findings are unclear. One possibility, of course, is that a
2
Distinguishing between these possibilities requires knowing the date on which rejected drug candidates
are rejected. Unfortunately this is unobserved.

2

Page 4 of 46

rushed review process decreases public welfare by increasing the likelihood that dangerous
drugs enter the market. However, if regulators were generally too conservative in new drug
approvals, then rushed review may actually be welfare-improving—even given an increase in
adverse effects—because it moves the review standard closer to first best. Because we cannot
observe the benefits that accrue to patients administered these drugs, our analysis cannot
distinguish between these two possibilities. That said, we do perform a back-of-the-envelope
estimation to get a sense of the magnitude at least of the costs associated with this pattern
of rushed review. Our calculation suggests that between 1,400 and 9,000 lives are lost per
year to rushed review; given a low-end estimate of the value of a statistical life ($885K per
life), this works out to roughly $1.2 to $8 billion implied loss per year over our sample period.
That said, even if a drug approval agency were broadly too conservative in its approval
decisions across all drugs, an optimal policy response would not be to apply more lax
screening only to those drugs nearing approval at the end of the year or month.3 We
outline two potential policy responses, one based on a mandated smoothing of approvals
over time, and another based on using a “holding-tank” mechanism in which some drugs
approved during high-volume periods are slated for re-review prior to receiving a final
go-ahead.
Situating our work in the literature, production targets—both formal and informal—are
ubiquitous across the economy, and similar spikes in output have been documented in settings
ranging from sales (Larkin (2014), Oyer (1998)) to patent office approvals (Blatt and Huang
(2018)) to judicial decisions (Gelbach and Marcus (2017)), to spending at federal agencies
(Liebman and Mahoney (2017)).
Moreover, trading off costs and benefits in intertemporal choice, and models surrounding
seeming behavioral irregularities in this decision-making, go back to Strotz (1955) and Phelps
and Pollak (1968); continuing through the hyperbolic discounting models of Laibson (1997),
O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a), and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b). The experimental and
empirical literature has further established a strong behavioral tendency of procrastination;
to which ”deadlines” have been proposed as solutions. More specifically, O’Donoghue and
Rabin (1999b) show how incentive schemes with “deadlines” may be a useful screening device
to distinguish efficient delay from inefficient procrastination.
Our work is most closely related to Carpenter, Zucker and Avorn (2008) and Carpenter
et al. (2012), both of which study the impact of formal deadlines imposed by the U.S.
3

As we see no spikes in “days under consideration” for drugs in December, it is not that agencies are
saving their most difficult cases for year- or month-end (or before holidays). Nor do we see any strategic
timing in terms of submissions on the side of drug-makers in terms of their submission timing of drugs.

3

Page 5 of 46

Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 on drug approvals; they find that more drugs are
approved prior to their review deadlines, and that drugs approved during these periods
are more likely to face post-marketing safety problems.4 In addition, Carpenter (2010)
documents an elevated share of drug approvals occurring in December, but does not explore
the causes or safety consequences of this.
Our work makes three key contributions relative to this body of existing literature. First,
we show that regulators across the globe appear to strongly respond to common informal
deadlines based on psychological benchmarks that are independent of externally imposed
administrative deadlines. Second, we find that drugs approved during these output surges
have substantially more adverse health effects relative to drugs approved at other times.
These results provide evidence that informal deadlines can distort drug approvals just as
much as formal deadlines.5
Finally, we show that—precisely because they are not generated by any specific
administrative policy—these behavioral responses to informal deadlines are a robust
world-wide phenomenon. Such patterns highlight the importance of developing policy
responses to address non-policy-induced inefficiencies in behavior.

1

Background on Drug Approvals

Drugs cannot be widely marketed without regulatory approval from country- or
region-level agencies. The decisions of these agencies determine what treatments are
available to patients and who profits as a result.
Seeking agency approval is the final step in a drug development process that is lengthy,
expensive, and uncertain. Firms typically test thousands of compounds to find one with
enough therapeutic potential to be tested in humans. Human clinical trials, further, involve
thousands of patients and typically last for five to ten years. On average, 90% of drug
4

See also Nardinelli, Lanthier and Temple (2008) and Schick et al. (2017), however, for evidence that
challenges the robustness of these original findings. More generally, also see Darrow, Avorn and Kesselheim
(2017) for a review of the interplay between incentives, user fees, and the timeliness and safety of FDA
approvals, and Darrow and Kesselheim (2014) for a list of important legislative and regulatory events related
to the FDA’s new drug approval process, along with Kesselheim and Darrow (2015) for recent trends in
expedited approval program use.
5
See Carpenter and Grimmer (2009) and Balasubramanian, Lee and Sivadasan (2017) for theories of
how formal deadlines and deadline-related time pressures can impact work quality. Also see Brunnermeier,
Papakonstantinou and Parker (2008) and Buehler, Griffin and Ross (1994) for theory and evidence on the
planning fallacy and the imposition of self-imposed deadlines.

4

