The Long-Run Effects of School Racial Diversity on Political
Identity
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0336.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
02-Dec-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Billings, Stephen; University of Colorado Boulder, Finance
Chyn, Eric; Dartmouth College, Economics
Haggag, Kareem; Carnegie Mellon University, Social and Decision
Sciences
Keywords: D70, I20, J15

Page 1 of 46

The Long-Run Effects of School Racial Diversity on
Political Identity∗
Stephen B. Billings, Eric Chyn, and Kareem Haggag
December 2, 2020

Abstract
How do early-life experiences shape political identity? We examine the end of racebased busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools, an event that led to large changes in
school racial composition. Using administrative data, we compare party affiliation in
adulthood for students who had lived on opposite sides of newly-drawn school boundaries. Consistent with the contact hypothesis, we find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a white student’s assigned school decreased their
likelihood of registering as a Republican by 2 percentage points (12 percent). Our results suggest that schools in childhood play an important role in shaping partisanship.

∗

Billings: Leeds School of Business, University of Colorado-Boulder, stephen.billings@colorado.edu. Koelbel 443, 995 Regent Drive, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309. Chyn: Department of Economics,
Dartmouth College, eric.t.chyn@dartmouth.edu. 6106 Rockefeller Center, Hanover, NH 03755, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Haggag: Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,
kareem.haggag@cmu.edu. 208-H Porter Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. We are grateful to Donald Green, Ethan
Kaplan, Dean Karlan, Erzo Luttmer, Elizabeth Setren, Jorg Spenkuch, Cody Tuttle, and Ebonya Washington
for helpful comments and suggestions. In addition, we thank the editor Rohini Pande and three anonymous
referees for detailed comments and feedback. This project received IRB approval from the University of
Colorado-Boulder (IRB Protocol Number: 16-0608).

Page 2 of 46

Political partisanship shapes the way individuals see and interact with the world. In the
U.S., partisanship strongly predicts a range of political opinions and economic perceptions
(Bartels, 2000; Gerber and Huber, 2010; Lenz, 2012; Achen and Bartels, 2016). Moreover,
recent studies provide evidence that partisan identity has causal effects on both political
behavior and attitudes (Gerber et al., 2010; McConnell et al., 2017; Barber and Pope, 2019).
What are the origins of partisanship? Leading theories posit that childhood experiences
play a key role in determining political identity and behavior (Campbell et al., 1960; Hess
and Torney, 1967; Jennings and Niemi, 1968; Green et al., 2002; Jennings et al., 2009; Stoker
and Bass, 2011). Yet, a lingering concern is that correlational evidence of a link between partisanship and childhood circumstances may largely reflect the influence of omitted variables.
For example, exposure to minorities or peers from a different social class during one’s youth
could reflect unmeasured attitudes that affect later-life political identity.
This paper provides new evidence on the determinants of partisan identity by studying the causal effects of an important and sudden shock to the social lives of youth. In
2002, the Charlotte-Mecklenburg school (CMS) district ended race-based busing and redrew
school attendance boundaries. These reforms led to large changes in the racial composition
of schools.
We use this setting to examine the effects of changes in the share of minorities in a student’s assigned school on their political party registration measured in adulthood. Exposure
to diversity within schools could impact partisanship by influencing preferences or beliefs
on race and economic policies that sharply differ between the two major U.S. political parties. For example, prior research has shown that differences in racial attitudes have played a
central role in determining partisan preferences in the South since the 1960s (Carmines and
Stimson, 1989; Valentino and Sears, 2005; Kousser, 2010; Kuziemko and Washington, 2018).
In contemporary surveys, the average registered Democrat and Republican substantially
disagree on a number of race-related issues such as the prevalence of racism (see Appendix
Figure A1).
To identify causal impacts, we compare students who lived in the same neighborhoods
and had pre-reform addresses that placed them on different sides of a newly-drawn school
boundary. Our approach follows prior work studying schooling and arrest outcomes in this
context (Billings et al., 2014) and estimates the effect of being assigned to a school with a
higher share of minority peers after conditioning on fixed effects for small geographic areas
(i.e., Census block groups). This approach reveals causal effects if children on either side of
the new boundary are similar prior to the redrawing. Institutional features of our setting

1

Page 3 of 46

support the plausibility of this assumption, and we provide statistical evidence showing no
evidence of systematic sorting within neighborhoods based on the new school boundaries.
Our analysis is based on student-level administrative records linked to voting records.
The sample consists of elementary and middle school students who were enrolled in CMS
prior to school reassignments. All voting records are current as of 2019, when the average
student in our sample was 29 years old. Our main analysis presents estimates separately for
white and racial minority students.
We find that assignment to schools with higher shares of minorities significantly impacts
the likelihood that white students register as Republicans in adulthood. A 10-percentage
point increase in the share of minorities in a white student’s assigned school decreases their
likelihood of being registered as a Republican by about 2 percentage points (a 12 percent
decrease relative to the mean Republican registration rate).1 These effects are robust to
conditioning on registration status (a post-treatment outcome). We find suggestive evidence
that white students are more likely to be registered as Democrat or Unaffiliated voters. For
minority students, we find a relatively precise null on Republican and Democrat registration
and an increase in Unaffiliated registration. For both white and minority students, we see
little evidence of changes in voter turnout.
What mechanisms can explain our results? Intergroup contact is a key potential channel.
Several theoretical frameworks provide predictions for how exposure to more minority peers
may shape party affiliation. For white students, we focus on the “contact hypothesis,” which
posits that meaningful contact with out-group members can reduce prejudice toward them
(Allport, 1954). This theory suggests that exposure to minority peers should reduce the
likelihood of registering as a Republican by weakening “racially conservative” attitudes that
have been linked to support for the Republican Party.2 Our results are consistent with this
prediction.3 For minority students, our analysis can be interpreted through theories that link
intergroup contact and social norms. Recent work in political science argues that support
1

The omitted category in this specification is composed of students registered as Democrat, as Unaffiliated, as one of three other officially recognized parties, or those who remain unregistered.
2
Since minorities in our sample typically live in low-income households, it is possible that intergroup
contact along the lines of economic class may decrease support for economic policies supported by the
Republican Party, a point we return to in Section IV.
3
Notably, our results stand in contrast to “racial threat” theory (Key, 1949). This framework posits that
Whites’ proximity to Black communities can trigger hostile racial attitudes, as Whites perceive their status
as threatened. Several studies have found evidence consistent with this threat hypothesis, including Enos
(2014), Enos et al. (2019), Condra and Linardi (2019), Hangartner et al. (2019). In a related vein, recent
studies of the political economy of immigration have found that immigrant inflows tend to increase support
for far-right political groups (Halla et al., 2017; Dustmann et al., 2019; Tabellini, 2020), though others have
found more nuanced results (Mayda et al., 2018; Steinmayr, 2020).

2

Page 4 of 46

for the Democratic Party is a well-understood norm for Black Americans, the predominant
minority group in our setting (White and Laird, 2020).4 This theory predicts that Black
children who are exposed to more Black peers in school should have a greater likelihood of
adhering to this group norm, thereby increasing their likelihood of registering as Democrats.
We only find weak and indirect evidence in line with this prediction.5
While intergroup contact is a leading mechanism in our context, two additional potential
mediators have been documented in this setting. Specifically, Billings et al. (2014) found that
changes in school racial composition due to CMS re-zoning significantly impacted college
attendance and arrests for white and minority students, respectively. To assess the relevance
of education and crime effects as mediators for the results on political behavior, we examine
heterogeneity in the effects of school diversity by student age at the time of the CMS reforms.
To do this, we supplement our main analysis sample with high school students. For education
and arrest outcomes, we find that the negative impacts of changes in school composition are
specific to older children. In contrast, the effects on party affiliation are largest for the
younger children. Overall, the pattern of results suggests that impacts of school diversity on
education and crime do not mediate the changes in partisanship.
Our analysis contributes to three main literatures. First, we contribute to understanding
how early-life factors affect political behavior and party affiliation. The bulk of this literature
provides descriptive analysis of social influences such as parents or institutional influences
such as schools (e.g., Campbell et al. 1960). Recent work has innovated by placing greater
emphasis on identification of causal impacts. For example, studies have found that changes
in family income (Akee et al., 2018), education-related interventions (Sondheimer and Green,
2010; Holbein, 2017), and neighborhood relocation (Chyn and Haggag, 2019) have important
impacts on later-life voter participation. Fewer studies have produced credible estimates of
causal impacts of early-life conditions on partisanship. One exception is Healy and Malhotra
(2013). They use random variation in sibling gender to show that young men who have sisters
(rather than brothers) are more likely to identify as Republicans. Our findings complement
their analysis by demonstrating that partisanship can also be shaped by factors outside of
the household.
Second, we contribute to studies of exposure to diversity and social behavior. While a
link between school segregation and intergroup attitudes has long been suggested (Schofield,
1991), there is relatively little causal field evidence. Recently, Rao (2019) studied a natural
4
5

In our sample, 84 percent of minorities are Black.
Section III discusses the interpretation of our results in more detail.

3

Page 5 of 46

experiment in Indian schools and found that increased contact across economic status generates short-run increases in tolerance and out-group friendship. In the U.S., Carrell et al.
(2019) finds that white students who are randomly assigned a Black roommate in their freshmen year are more likely to choose a Black roommate in subsequent years. Mousa (2020)
and Lowe (2019) also provide experimental evidence of positive impacts of religious-based
and caste-based intergroup contact through sports. Our paper complements these findings
by demonstrating that a large-scale school policy change that affected intergroup contact
can generate long-lasting changes in partisanship.6
Last, we contribute to an important literature studying the effects of segregation and
school integration policies. Several prior studies have estimated effects on student-level outcomes (Guryan, 2004; Ashenfelter et al., 2006; Reber, 2010; Johnson, 2011; Lutz, 2011;
Billings et al., 2014; Gordon and Reber, 2018; Shen, 2018; Tuttle, 2019; Bergman, 2020). To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide credible estimates of the impact of
school segregation on political preferences.
I.

Background, Data, and Sample

A. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, New School Zones, and the End of Race-based Busing
Since the Supreme Court’s 1971 Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools decision, CMS
had operated under a racial desegregation order. Based on this Court order, CMS had drawn
school zones to include non-contiguous areas with different racial compositions. School officials aimed to keep each school’s percent Black within 15 percentage points of the district
average. Racial balance was preserved by using “satellite” zones that bused students from
inner-city neighborhoods with high shares of minority students to suburban, highly white
schools.
In the summer of 2002, CMS drew new school boundaries and ended race-based busing.
These changes stemmed from a series of court battles culminating in the dismissal of the
desegregation plan (United States District Court, 1999). CMS drew new school boundaries
for the 2002-2003 year as contiguous areas around schools, eliminating the satellite zones
previously used to bus students from inner-city neighborhoods. CMS made decisions for the
new boundaries based on enrollment projections and attempted to minimize the possibility of overcrowding. Attendance zones often had to deviate from using natural geographic
features or standard U.S. Census geographies to avoid assignment based explicitly on race.
6

A few other studies examine long-run effects of intergroup contact through residential location (Bazzi
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Goldman and Hopkins, 2020).

4

