Is the Supply of Charitable Donations Fixed? Evidence from
Deadly Tornadoes
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0230.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
07-Sep-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Deryugina, Tatyana; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Finance
Marx, Benjamin; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Economics
Keywords: D64, Q54, L31

Page 1 of 41

Disclosure Statement
Tatyana Deryugina
The author declares that she has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper. The research was supported by a $40,000 grant from the Indiana
University School of Philanthropy.
The authors did not seek IRB approval for the project because the project does not constitute
human subjects research.
The author holds no paid or unpaid positions with any relevant organizations. No other party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

Page 2 of 41

Disclosure Statement
Benjamin M. Marx
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper. The research was supported by a $40,000 grant from the Indiana
University School of Philanthropy.
The authors did not seek IRB approval for the project. This project uses publicly available
datasets in which the units of observation are ZIP Codes or charitable organizations.
The author holds no paid or unpaid positions with any relevant organizations. No other party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

Page 3 of 41

Is the Supply of Charitable Donations Fixed?
Evidence from Deadly Tornadoes∗
Tatyana Deryugina† and Benjamin M. Marx‡
August 2020

Abstract
Do natural disasters increase charitable giving or simply reallocate a fixed supply of
donations? We study this question using IRS data in the context of deadly tornadoes.
We find that, among ZIP Codes located in the same state but more than 20 miles
away from a tornado’s path, donations by households increase by about $2 million
per tornado fatality. We find no negative effects of tornado fatalities on donations to
charities located in these ZIP Codes. The results imply that giving in response to new
needs need not come at the expense of other causes.
JEL codes: D64, Q54, L31

∗ We thank the Lilly Family School of Philanthropy for financial support. We thank Yuci Chen, Arash

Farahani, Chitra Jogani, and Dana Shaat for excellent research assistance. We thank Maja Adena, Wojciech
Kopczuk, Rob McClelland, David Molitor, Una Osili, Mark Ottoni-Wilhelm, Michael Price, Sarah Smith;
seminar participants at Drexel University and the University of Illinois; and participants at the 2016 ASSA
meetings, the 2016 ARNOVA Conference, the 2018 Science of Philanthropy Initiative Conference, the 2018
National Tax Association Annual Conference, and the 2020 Mid-Midwest Applied Microeconomics Workshop for their helpful comments.
† Geis College of Business, University of Illinois, IZA, and NBER. Address: 4050 BIF, 515 E. Gregory Dr.,
Champaign, IL, 61820. Email: deryugin@illinois.edu.
‡ Department of Economics, University of Illinois, 214 David Kinley Hall, 1407 W. Gregory Dr., Urbana,
Illinois 61801, MC-707. Email: benmarx@illinois.edu.

1

Page 4 of 41

1 Introduction
Charitable donations are an important source of funding for public goods and redistribution. Overall, U.S. charitable giving makes up about 2 percent of GDP (List, 2011). But
it is not well-understood whether an exogenous shock to human need, such as a natural disaster, increases total giving or simply displaces donations that would have gone to
other causes. Many laboratory experiments find that incentives or opportunities to donate to one charity reduces giving to the others.1 However, the laboratory setting may
not be reflective of typical giving. Outside of the laboratory, credible causal estimates of
displacement effects between causes are rare and generally encompass a small share of
charities or of total donations.
We estimate whether deadly tornadoes increase the total amount of charitable giving.
We measure charitable giving using an annual panel of ZIP-Code-level individual income
tax data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which report all income tax deductions
claimed for donations to any registered charity in 2002–2017. Only about 30 percent of
households itemize deductions, and itemized donations are disproportionately concentrated among high-income households (Internal Revenue Service, 2020). However, about
84 percent of donations by individuals are itemized, and giving by individuals comprised
about 70 percent of all giving in 2017 (Giving USA Foundation, 2018).
We combine the IRS data with geospatial information on the incidence of tornadoes.
We focus our attention on lethal tornadoes, which allows us to identify events that affected populated areas and caused tens of millions of dollars’ worth of damage, on average. Tornadoes offer a useful natural experiment because they vary over both space and
time but are generally limited in their geographic scope. Because tornadoes are shortlived and unpredictable, scientists have not been able to capture most tornadoes’ physical
properties, such as wind speed. Instead, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin1 See, for example, Reinstein (2012); Cairns and Slonim (2011); Reinstein (2011); Corazzini, Cotton and

Valbonesi (2015); Ek (2017); Filiz-Ozbay and Uler (2017); Deck and Murphy (2019); Harwell, Zindler and
Eckel. (2020); Schmitz (2019).

2

Page 5 of 41

istration (NOAA) maintains a database capturing tornado-related fatalities, injuries, and
property damage—which are functions of both the tornado’s physical properties and the
characteristics of the area in which it touches down—of each reported tornado since 1950.
Our identifying assumption is that, conditional on a host of fixed effects and controls,
tornado fatalities are unrelated to any unobservable determinants of charitable giving.
We find that lethal tornadoes significantly increase total charitable donations by individuals living nearby but outside of the directly affected area. Specifically, a tornado
fatality increases total donations by individuals living at least 20 miles away from a tornado’s path but in the same state by about $2 million. Because total giving increases, we
can rule out perfect substitution between charitable causes and conclude that the supply
of donations is not fixed.
We then estimate fatal tornadoes’ effects on the receipts of charities using data from
information returns that charities file annually with the IRS. The charitable response to a
severe tornado typically involves providing victims with basic necessities such as food,
clothing, and shelter; tools for clean-up, such as gloves and shovels; and health services,
including for mental health.2 This work is done both by large organizations like the American Red Cross and by local organizations. We show that contributions received by charities within 20 miles of a tornado’s path increase by more than $1 million per fatality. We
also test whether there is a negative displacement effect on charities in locations more
than 20 miles away but in the same state—locations from which total giving increased.
Our estimate of the effect on donations to charities in these locations is positive and not
statistically significant, suggesting that donations to these charities do not decrease because of increased giving in response to fatal tornadoes.
Charitable giving for natural disasters is common, with a nationally representative
survey indicating that about 30 percent of U.S. households made such donations in each
of 2017 and 2018 (Bergdoll et al., 2019). Motivations for disaster giving vary, as demon2 See,

for
example,
tornado-relief.html.

https://www.redcross.org/about-us/our-work/disaster-relief/

3

