The impact of the Affordable Care Act: Evidence from
California's hospital sector
Journal: American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
Manuscript ID AEJPol-2019-0279.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I10, I38, H00

Page 1 of 102

Disclosure Statement
1. I obtained the confidential hospital and Emergency room discharge data under a Data Use
Agreement with California’s Office of Statewide Health, Planning, and Development
(OSHPD).
2. No federal or state agency – including OSHPD – has reviewed the manuscript prior to
circulation.
3. I have not received financial support from any interested party in the last three years
4. I have no paid or unpaid position on any relevant non-profit or for-profit entity, other than
at the University of Pennsylvania
5. We received approval from Stanford IRB for this project.

Sincerely
Atul Gupta
Assistant Professor
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania

Page 2 of 102

Disclosure Statement for Mark Duggan
“The Impact of the Affordable Care Act:
Evidence from California’s Hospital Sector”
In reference to the instructions at the following AEA website with disclosure policy:
https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/disclosure-policy
1. I did not receive any financial support for my work on the paper referenced above.
2. I have not received any financial support in the past three years from a party that would
have a financial, ideological, or political stake in the paper referenced above. I have worked
as an “Expert” with Cornerstone Research and in one instance with Analysis Group, two
economic consulting firms. In this capacity, I have advised private sector firms in the health
care industry including mainly pharmaceutical manufacturers. None of these firms have
any interest in the results of the research summarized in this paper.
3. I am the Director of the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research and serve on the
Board of Directors of PAWS (Pets Are Worth Saving) Chicago. I previously served on the
advisory board of Nuna, Inc., which is a health care analytics startup. This advisory role
had no impact on the contents of this article, I have not received any financial support from
this company (though I do have a small equity stake), and this company has no interest in
the results of the research in this paper.
4. None of my close relatives have received any financial support for my work on the paper
referenced above. None of my close relatives have received any financial support in the
past three years from a party that would have a financial, ideological, or political stake in
the paper referenced above. None of my close relatives are an officer, director, or board
member in a profit or non-profit organization that has a relevant relationship to the contents
of the article referenced above.
5. No party had the right to review the paper prior to its submission.
We obtained the confidential hospital and emergency room discharge data under a Data Use
Agreement (DUA) with California’s Office of Statewide Health, Planning, and Development
(OSHPD). We have received approval from the IRB at Stanford University for this project.

Page 3 of 102

Disclosure Statement
1. I obtained the confidential hospital and Emergency room discharge data under a Data Use
Agreement with California’s Office of Statewide Health, Planning, and Development
(OSHPD).
2. No federal or state agency – including OSHPD – has reviewed the manuscript prior to
circulation.
3. I have not received financial support from any interested party in the last three years.
4. I have no paid or unpaid position on any relevant non-profit or for-profit entity.
5. We received approval from Stanford IRB for this project.

Sincerely
Emilie Jackson
Stanford University

Page 4 of 102

The Impact of the Affordable Care Act:
Evidence from California’s Hospital Sector
By MARK DUGGAN, ATUL GUPTA, AND EMILIE JACKSON *
We exploit changes in the discontinuity in health insurance coverage
at age 65 induced by the implementation of the Affordable Care Act
to examine effects on coverage, hospital use, and patient health. We
then link these changes to effects on hospital finances. We show that
a substantial share of the federally-funded Medicaid expansion
substituted for existing locally-funded safety net programs. Despite
this offset, the expansion produced a substantial increase in hospital
revenue, reflected in an equivalent increase in operating surplus. We
do not detect improvements in patient mortality, although the
expansion led to substantially greater hospital and emergency room
use.

* Duggan: Stanford University, 579 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 (mgduggan@stanford.edu). Gupta: The Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania, 3641 Locust Walk, 306 Colonial Penn Center, Philadelphia 19104
(atulgup@wharton.upenn.edu). Jackson: NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138 (jacksone@nber.org).
We would like to thank Abby Alpert, Marion Aouad, Bob Kaestner, Matthew Notowidigdo, Mark Shepard, Jacob Wallace,
Laura Wherry, four anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Arizona, Columbia, Johns Hopkins, Stanford, UCBerkeley, USC, and Wharton along with numerous participants at the AEA, the Annual Health Economics Conference
(USC), NBER Public Economics, Midwest Health Economics Conference (OSU), Western Economics Association, and
ASHEcon (DC) for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Betty Henderson-Sparks, Aaron Maggetti, Amy Peterson,
and Jon Teague of the California Office of Statewide Planning & Health Development for their assistance in providing the
Hospital/ER discharge data and to Jack Coolbaugh and Catherine Ishitani for excellent research assistance. All remaining
errors are our own.

The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) led to the largest
expansion of publicly funded health insurance coverage since the introduction of

Page 5 of 102

Medicare and Medicaid more than fifty years ago. The main provisions of this
legislation took effect in January 2014. In states that elected to expand their
Medicaid programs as allowed for by the ACA, individuals with family incomes at
or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) and without another source
of coverage could enroll in the means-tested Medicaid program. Those with
incomes above this threshold, but below 400 percent of the FPL and without
another source of coverage, could sign up for subsidized private health insurance
coverage in ACA mandated exchanges. From 2010 to 2017, the number of
Medicaid recipients nationally rose by 18 million while the number with coverage
through the ACA exchanges reached 12 million (CMS, 2018).
This intervention offers a unique opportunity to examine the effects of a
large expansion of public health insurance in a modern setting. We focus on the
state of California, which elected to expand Medicaid in January 2014. 1 From 2011
to 2016, Medicaid enrollment in the state increased from approximately 8 million
to more than 13 million (thus accounting for about one-third of the national increase
reported above), and Medicaid spending more than doubled from about $40 billion
to $90 billion (Taylor, 2017). Additionally, nearly 1.4 million Californians obtained
their health insurance through the state’s ACA health insurance exchange in 2016,
the final year of our study period. We use data on the universe of hospital stays and
emergency room (ER) visits in California combined with detailed data on hospital
finances from 2008 through 2016. Deploying two complementary research designs,
we quantify the effects of the ACA expansions for three key stakeholders—
providers, patients, and taxpayers—interpreted through hospital data.
We use a novel empirical approach that exploits the pre-existing
discontinuity in health insurance coverage at age 65 due to the discrete onset of

1

Twenty-four states and Washington, D.C., expanded their Medicaid programs in January 2014. In the six years since
January 2014, an additional 12 states have expanded or are in the process of expanding Medicaid as called for in the ACA.
Many of the remaining 14 states are actively considering expansion.

