Job Displacement Insurance and (the Lack of)
Consumption-Smoothing
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0388.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: J65, E21, E26

Page 1 of 100

Mandatory Disclosure Statement: François Gerard
I would like to disclose the following information according to the AER disclosure
requirements regarding the manuscript “Job Displacement Insurance and (the Lack of)
Consumption-Smoothing”. The numbered items below refer to the numbered items in the
“American Economic Association Disclosure Policy."
1. This article is part of a project that received research support from the International Growth
Centre (IGC), the National Science Foundation (NSF grant SES-1757105), and the Suntory and
Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines (STICERD).
2. This article is part of a research collaboration between an unnamed start-up firm (“data
owner”) and Columbia University. The article also used data from the Brazilian Ministry of
Labor. In both instances, the covenants contained in the data use authorization did not involve
any transfer of financial or pecuniary resources among the parties.
3. I have no disclosures regarding paid or unpaid positions.
4. I have no disclosures regarding a relative or partner.
5. We had complete academic freedom in all aspects of the data analysis and interpretation.
All the administrative data used in this article were de-identified and a number of measures
were taken to protect the confidentiality of the data. Yet, the data are still considered
confidential, and the agreement requires that the data owner reviews the research prior to its
release in order to ensure that the confidentiality of the data was not unintentionally
compromised. The data owner did not have any say in how the analysis was conducted; the
disclosure procedure was restricted to ensuring that the publication only included aggregated
statistics of the data.
6. I have no disclosures regarding potential conflicts of interest.
This article is part of a project that obtained Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval from
Columbia University and Research Ethics approval from the London School of Economics.

Page 2 of 100

Mandatory Disclosure Statement: Joana Naritomi
I would like to disclose the following information according to the AER disclosure
requirements regarding the manuscript “Job Displacement Insurance and (the Lack of)
Consumption-Smoothing”. The numbered items below refer to the numbered items in the
“American Economic Association Disclosure Policy."
1. This article is part of a project that received research support from the International Growth
Centre (IGC), the National Science Foundation (NSF grant SES-1757105), and the Suntory and
Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines (STICERD).
2. This article is part of a research collaboration between an unnamed start-up firm (“data
owner”) and Columbia University. The article also used data from the Brazilian Ministry of
Labor. In both instances, the covenants contained in the data use authorization did not involve
any transfer of financial or pecuniary resources among the parties.
3. I have no disclosures regarding paid or unpaid positions.
4. I have no disclosures regarding a relative or partner.
5. We had complete academic freedom in all aspects of the data analysis and interpretation.
All the administrative data used in this article were de-identified and a number of measures
were taken to protect the confidentiality of the data. Yet, the data are still considered
confidential, and the agreement requires that the data owner reviews the research prior to its
release in order to ensure that the confidentiality of the data was not unintentionally
compromised. The data owner did not have any say in how the analysis was conducted; the
disclosure procedure was restricted to ensuring that the publication only included aggregated
statistics of the data.
6. I have no disclosures regarding potential conflicts of interest.
This article is part of a project that obtained Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval from
Columbia University and Research Ethics approval from the London School of Economics.

Page 3 of 100

Job Displacement Insurance and
(the Lack of) Consumption-Smoothing
By François Gerard and Joana Naritomi∗
We study the spending profile of workers who experience both a
positive transitory income shock (lump-sum severance pay) and
a negative permanent income shock (layoff ). Using de-identified
expenditure and employment data from Brazil, we show that workers increase spending at layoff by 35% despite experiencing a 14%
long-term loss. We find high sensitivity of spending to cash-onhand across consumption categories and for several sources of variation, including predictable income drops. A model with presentbiased workers can rationalize our findings, and highlights the importance of the timing of benefit disbursement for the consumptionsmoothing gains of job displacement insurance policies.
Do consumers smooth consumption? This classic question in economics has
received renewed attention in recent years following the availability of new data
sources on consumer spending (Gelman et al. 2014, Pistaferri 2015). Across different contexts, this recent body of work has documented a high sensitivity of
consumption to positive transitory income shocks (e.g., Shapiro 2005, Parker et
al. 2013, Baker and Yannelis 2017, Olafsson and Pagel 2018). In this paper, we
study a context in which incentives to smooth are particularly strong. We examine the spending behavior of individuals who receive a lump-sum severance
pay – a positive transitory income shock – at the same time as they are laid-off
and thus experience a negative permanent income shock (e.g., Stephens 2001,
Hendren 2017). Standard economic models with forward-looking agents would
typically predict that a large part of this lump-sum should be saved to smooth
consumption losses from the negative permanent income shock.
We use de-identified expenditure data linked to matched employee-employer
data from Brazil, where laid-off workers are eligible for a government-mandated
Severance Pay (SP), in addition to Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits. Figure 1 shows that these two forms of job displacement insurance have become
∗ Gerard: Queen Mary University, Mile End Road London E1 4NS UK, f.gerard@qmul.ac.uk. Naritomi: London School of Economics, Houghton Street London WC2A 2AE UK, J.Naritomi@lse.ac.uk.
IRB protocol: IRB-AAAQ8869. We would like to thank Alberto Alesina, Oriana Bandiera, Michael Best,
Lorenzo Casaburi, Raj Chetty, Mark Dean, Stefano DellaVigna, Itzik Fadlon, John Friedman, Gustavo
Gonzaga, Nathan Hendren, Nate Hilger, Ethan Ilzetzki, Yuhta Ishii, Camille Landais, Guilherme Lichand,
Attila Lindner, Arash Nekoei, Paul Niehaus, Matthew Notowidigdo, Debraj Ray, Johannes Schmieder,
Jesse Shapiro, Johannes Spinnewijn, and many participants at various seminars and conferences. We
would also like to thank the International Growth Centre, the National Science Foundation (NSF grant
SES-1757105), and STICERD for their financial support. Otávio Braga, Rodrigo Candido, Cristiano
Carvalho, Daniel Deibler, Jack Fisher, Dario Fonseca, Samira Noronha, Luiz Superti and a wonderful
team of Columbia undergraduates provided outstanding research assistance.

1

Page 4 of 100

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

increasingly common around the world in the last 100 years, and that SP and UI
programs often co-exist today (Holzmann et al., 2012).
Our main result is that workers increase spending upon layoff by about 35%
despite experiencing a 14% long-term loss when they stop receiving any benefits.
We interpret these patterns as changes in consumption because they are robust
across spending categories, and are not driven by durable goods. Moreover, this
high sensitivity of consumer spending to cash-on-hand is present for other sources
of variation, including the predictable income drop at the exhaustion of UI benefits
(Ganong and Noel, 2019). We show that a simple structural model with presentbiased workers can rationalize our findings. We then use the model to illustrate
their implications for disbursement policies, which have been largely overlooked
by the UI literature. We show that the insurance value of providing liquidity to
workers in a lump-sum fashion at layoff – as with SP programs – can be severely
reduced when consumption is over-sensitive to the timing of benefit disbursement.
We begin by describing the empirical setting. We study the state of São Paulo,
which is the largest and most developed state of Brazil.1 During the period of
analysis, displaced workers were eligible for up to 5 months of UI (at an average replacement rate of 0.75 in our sample), and for a lump-sum payment that
combines a government-mandated severance pay from the employer and the permission to withdraw from a forced Severance Savings Account. Because we focus
on the way benefits are paid (rather than how they are financed),2 we refer to both
of these lump-sums under the term Severance Pay (SP) in the paper (combined,
they amount to 4.73 times a worker’s monthly wage on average in our sample).
We also present our data. In 2007, the state of São Paulo introduced monetary
incentives for consumers to ask for receipts (Nota Fiscal Paulista program) in
order to reduce the misreporting of sales subject to the state Value Added Tax.
To participate, consumers only have to spell out their ID number at the moment of
purchase to be included on the receipt, and sellers are required to report receipts to
the tax authority, including the consumers’ ID number when provided (Naritomi
2019). This is analogous to giving a loyalty card number at the grocery store,
which is not very burdensome (Hastings and Shapiro 2018). Perhaps due to low
participation costs, the take-up of this program has been substantial. By 2015,
more than 18 million people had created online accounts at the tax authority’s
website to monitor receipts issued with their ID numbers and to claim rewards.
Although the program did not aim at recording individual expenditures, its implementation linked receipts to individual ID numbers, creating a high-frequency
record of participants’ reported expenditures. We obtained access to these ex1 The informal sector remains important in São Paulo. We discuss informality and how it interacts with
the formal labor market in section I.A. Henceforth, we use employment to refer to formal employment.
2 Job displacement insurance programs differ in their benefit payout schemes – lump-sum vs. statecontingent – and in their financing schemes – insurance-based vs. savings-based (Parsons, 2016). According to this typology, SP and UI programs are typically insurance-based. Severance Savings Accounts
(SSA) – forced savings accounts that workers can withdraw from at separation – are common in Latin
American countries. Unemployment Insurance Savings accounts (UISA) – forced savings accounts from
which workers can withdraw a fixed amount periodically, contingent on non-employment – remain rare.

Page 5 of 100

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

JOB DISPLACEMENT INSURANCE AND CONSUMPTION

3

penditure data for about 400,000 de-identified workers that were anonymously
matched with the Brazilian employee-employer dataset.3 The matched data allow us to trace individual labor market information, displacement events, and
consumer spending from 2010 to 2015. We also have data on UI benefit claims
for these workers from 2010 to 2012 (with exact payment dates). One data limitation is that we do not observe SP, but we have rich data to calculate the lump-sum
amount that each worker should receive based on the statutory rules.
We show that displaced workers in our data are relatively comparable to the
universe of displaced workers in São Paulo. We also show that our expenditure
data provide partial but meaningful coverage for purchases subject to the VAT
(it excludes services and housing) and that its coverage is stable across income
groups. Importantly, these data include the date and amount of each receipt, and
detailed sector information for the seller allowing us to categorize expenditures.
Receipts are also reported irrespective of the amount or mode of payment.
Next, we turn to the empirics. First, we present the results of a difference-indifferences analysis in which we estimate changes in expenditures for displaced
workers in the 12 months before and after layoff, compared to a control group of
workers employed over the whole 25-month period. Trends are similar prior to
layoff, but spending increases sharply after layoff for displaced workers, by about
35%. Consumer spending decreases in subsequent months, implying a long-run
loss of 17% for workers who remain non-employed 12 months after layoff, and of
14% for the overall sample. In present value, the change in consumer spending
after layoff (including the transitory increase and the long-term loss) corresponds
to a loss of 9% per month (using a 6% annual discount rate).
Importantly, workers who are fired for cause are not eligible for any benefits
and they experience a sharp and persistent expenditure drop at separation. This
suggests that the job displacement insurance benefits are the key driver of the
spending profile that we observe for laid-off workers. In addition, workers eligible
for higher SP amounts have higher consumption levels in the first months after
layoff. These empirical links between spending and benefits – comparing workers
who had similar changes in economic condition but different benefits – alleviate
concerns that the results are driven by changes in receipt reporting. Moreover,
our estimates are not driven by composition effects or differences in time-inhand: the spike at layoff is similar whether workers are reemployed immediately
or remain non-employed 12 months after layoff. Finally, the effects are large for
various definitions of non-durables, including for sub-categories like food. We
thus interpret our findings, at least for non-durables, as consumption responses.
We also exploit other sources of variation in the data. In so doing, we provide
further support for the quality of our data as we are able to replicate related
findings from the literature. First, we study changes in non-durable expenditures
3 The sample of de-identified workers was drawn from users of a smartphone application that offers
services to its users based on their account data (see Section I.C). De-identified versions of the data
were analyzed in a secure network-isolated data room; no data was shared with the developers of the
application, and no original matched data was taken outside the secure data room.

