Using Models to Persuade
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1074.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: persuasion, framing, advice

Page 1 of 87

JOSHUA SCHWARTZSTEIN

|

A S S O C I AT E P R O F E S S O R

August 03, 2020
To Whom It May Concern:
I declare that I do not have any relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in
this paper, “Using Models to Persuade.”

Sincerely,

Joshua Schwartzstein

G EO RG E F. BA K E R FO U N DAT I O N
BA K E R L I B R A RY | B L O O M B E RG C E N T E R 4 6 1 | B O STO N, M A 0 2 1 6 3 | P h 6 1 7 . 4 9 6 . 5 9 1 0 | Fx 6 1 7 . 4 9 5 . 7 6 7 0 | j s c hwa r t z s t e i n @ h b s . e d u

Page 2 of 87

ADI SUNDERAM

|

P R O F E S S O R O F B U S I N E S S A D M I N I S T R AT I O N

August 03, 2020
To Whom It May Concern:
I declare that I do not have any relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in
this paper, “Using Models to Persuade.”

Sincerely,

Adi Sunderam

G EORG E F. BAKER FOUNDATION
BA K E R L I BR A RY | BL O O M B ER G C EN TE R 3 5 9 | B O S TO N, MA 0 2 1 6 3 | P h 6 1 7 . 4 9 5 . 6 6 4 4 | Fx 6 1 7 . 4 9 5 . 7 6 7 0 | as u n d er a m@ h b s . e d u

Page 3 of 87

Using Models to Persuade
Joshua Schwartzstein

Adi Sunderam∗

Harvard Business School

Harvard Business School

August 31, 2020

Abstract
We present a framework where “model persuaders” influence receivers’ beliefs by proposing models that organize past data to make predictions. Receivers are assumed to find models
more compelling when they better explain the data, fixing receivers’ prior beliefs. Model
persuaders face a tradeoff: better-fitting models induce less movement in receivers’ beliefs.
Consequently, a receiver exposed to the true model can be most misled by persuasion when
that model fits poorly, competition between persuaders tends to neutralize the data by pushing
towards better-fitting models, and a persuader facing multiple receivers is more effective when
he can send tailored, private messages.

Persuasion often involves an expert providing a “model” of the world, an interpretation of
known data. When real-estate agents tell potential home buyers, “House prices in this neighborhood are high because of the schools,” they are supplying a model: home buyers should pay attention to local schools, which are an important determinant of house prices. Potential Presidential
candidates who do poorly in the Iowa caucuses often point donors to the New Hampshire primary
saying, “They pick corn in Iowa and presidents in New Hampshire,” suggesting that Iowa results
should not figure in donors’ model of ultimate campaign success. In these examples, an expert
makes the case using data their audience may already be aware of. The key persuasive element is
not the information itself. It is that the expert highlights a relationship between outcomes and data
in a way that logically leads the audience to take an action the expert favors.
∗

E-mails: jschwartzstein@hbs.edu and asunderam@hbs.edu. We thank Ned Augenblick, Francesca Bastianello,
Max Bazerman, Roland Benabou, Pedro Bordalo, Stefano DellaVigna, Erik Eyster, Xavier Gabaix, Tristan GagnonBartsch, Nicola Gennaioli, Matt Gentzkow, Robert Gibbons, Russell Golman, Brian Hall, Sam Hanson, Botond
Koszegi, George Loewenstein, Deepak Malhotra, Ulrike Malmendier, Kathleen McGinn, Sendhil Mullainathan, Ramana Nanda, Matthew Rabin, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Kelly Shue, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein, Dmitry Taubinsky, Tim Vogelsang, three anonymous referees, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, MIT, Harvard, Princeton,
CMU, BEAM 2019, and EBEM 2019 for helpful comments.

Page 4 of 87

Figure 1: Stylized Example of Model Persuasion from xkcd.com
Source: https://xkcd.com/2048/

This kind of persuasion using models is ubiquitous. In finance, when recent market performance is better than long-term averages, bullish traders argue “this time is different”. Stock market
analysts use technical analysis to argue that patterns in prices and trading volume identify profit opportunities. In debating climate change, one side might argue that extreme weather events provide
evidence of global warming, while the other might argue that they reflect “noise” in an inherently
unpredictable process. In politics, there are “spin rooms” where campaigns seek to influence interpretations of debate performances. In law, the defense and prosecution build their cases around the
same evidence. Recall the famous line from the O.J. Simpson trial that “If it [the glove] doesn’t
fit, you must acquit.” In advertising, firms propose frames that positively highlight known aspects
of their products. The car-rental company Avis, lagging behind Hertz in sales, ran a well-known
campaign with the slogan “When you’re only No. 2, you try harder”. When social scientists want
to build the case for a particular conclusion, they may draw curves through data points in ways
that make the conclusion visually compelling. (Figure 1 provides a humorous illustration of this
point.) Despite the pervasiveness of persuasion using models, economists’ understanding of persuasion (DellaVigna and Gentzkow 2010) has typically focused on the disclosure of information
(e.g., Milgrom 1981; Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011) rather than its interpretation.1
In this paper, we present a formal framework for studying “model persuasion.” We consider the
problem of a decision maker or “receiver”, who before taking an action needs to interpret a history
of outcomes that may be informative about a payoff-relevant state of nature. Persuaders propose
models for interpreting the history to the receiver. A model is a likelihood function that maps
the history to posterior beliefs for the receiver, in turn leading the receiver to take certain actions.
1

The few exceptions (e.g., Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Shleifer 2008) are described in more detail below.
There is also work (e.g., Becker and Murphy 1993) studying the idea that persuasion directly operates on preferences.

2

Page 5 of 87

The persuader’s incentives are to propose models that generate particular receiver actions, but the
persuader cannot influence the data itself. In other words, the persuader helps the receiver make
sense of the data. The persuader is constrained to propose models that the receiver is willing to
entertain, which we take as exogenous, and that are more compelling in the data than other models
the receiver is exposed to, which we endogenize.
A key ingredient of our framework is that we assume a proposed model is more compelling
than an alternative if it fits the receiver’s knowledge—the data plus the receiver’s prior—better
than the alternative. Essentially, we assume that the receiver performs a “Bayesian hypothesis
test”: from the set of models he is exposed to, he picks the one that makes the observed data most
likely given his prior. Formally, we assume model m (associated with likelihood function πm )
is more compelling than model m0 (with likelihood function πm0 ) given data h and prior µ0 over
states ω if:
Z
Z
Pr(h|m, µ0 ) = πm (h|ω)dµ0 (ω) ≥ πm0 (h|ω)dµ0 (ω) = Pr(h|m0 , µ0 ).
This assumption loosely corresponds to various ideas from the social sciences about what people
find persuasive, including that people favor models which (i) have high “fidelity” to the data as
emphasized in work on narratives (Fisher 1985); (ii) help with “sensemaking” as discussed in
work on organizational behavior and psychology (Weick 1995; Chater and Loewenstein 2016);
and (iii) feature the most “determinism” as documented in work on developmental and cognitive
psychology (Schulz and Sommerville 2006; Gershman 2018).2
To illustrate some of our basic insights, consider a simple example, which we will return to
throughout the paper. An investor is deciding whether to invest in an entrepreneur’s new startup
based on the entrepreneur’s past history of successes and failures. As shown in Figure 2a, the
entrepreneur’s first two startups failed, and the last three succeeded. The investor’s problem is to
predict the probability of success of the sixth startup. The investor’s prior is that that startup’s
probability of success, θ, is uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. Assume that, in the absence of persuasion, the investor would adopt the default view that the same success probability governs all of the
entrepreneur’s startups. Also assume for the purpose of the example that this is the true model.
The persuader wants the investor to invest, and thus wishes to propose models that maximize
the investor’s posterior expectation of θ. Suppose the receiver is willing to entertain the possibility that “this time is different”. That is, the receiver will entertain models suggesting that the
2

While our emphasis on models that satisfy fit constraints is (to our knowledge) novel in the context of persuasion,
there is work in decision theory that uses similar criteria in other settings. Most closely related, Levy and Razin (2020)
contemporaneously analyzes how people combine expert forecasts, assuming they favor explanations that maximize
the likelihood of the data. There is also work that draws out implications of related assumptions, including Epstein
and Schneider (2007) which studies learning under ambiguity; Ortoleva (2012) which studies “paradigm shifts”; and
Gagnon-Bartsch, Rabin, and Schwartzstein (2018) which studies when people “wake up” to their errors.

3

