The Long-Run Impacts of Special Education
Journal: American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
Manuscript ID AEJPol-2019-0603.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I21, J24, I26

Page 1 of 76

The Long-Run Impacts of Special Education
By Briana Ballis and Katelyn Heath∗
Over 13 percent of US students participate in Special Education
(SE) programs annually, at a cost of $40 billion. However, due to
selection issues the effect of SE placements remains unclear. This
paper uses administrative data from Texas to examine the long-run
effect of reducing SE access. Our research design exploits variation in SE placement driven by a unique state policy that required
school districts to reduce SE caseloads to 8.5 percent. This policy
led to sharp reductions in SE enrollment. These reductions generated significant reductions in educational attainment, suggesting
that marginal participants experience long-run benefits from SE
services.
In this paper, we provide evidence on the long-run causal effects of Special
Education (SE) by exploiting a unique policy change that introduced exogenous
variation in SE participation. In 2005, the Texas Department of Education implemented a district-level SE enrollment target of 8.5 percent. Over the next
ten years, statewide SE enrollment declined by 4.5 percentage points, from 13
percent to 8.5 percent. By 2018, roughly 225,000 fewer students were enrolled
in SE programs annually across the state.1 To our knowledge, this is the first
∗ Ballis: Department of Economics, University of California, Merced, 5200 N. Lake Rd., Merced, CA
95343, bballis@ucmerced.edu. Health: Texas Policy Lab, Rice University, 5620 Greenbriar Dr. Houston,
TX 77005, kmh8@rice.edu. We thank Scott Carrell, Paco Martorell, Marianne Page, Marianne Bitler,
Maria Fitzpatrick, Michael Lovenheim, Douglas Miller, Jordan Matsudaira, Michal Kurlaender, and
Jacob Hibel for useful discussions and suggestions. We would like to thank participants at the UC Davis
Applied Microeconomics Brown Bag, the Association for Education Finance and Policy 43rd Annual
Conference, the UC Davis Alumni conference, the Western Economic Association International 93rd
Annual Conference, the 40th annual Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management Conference,
and Claremont McKenna - Southern California Conference in Applied Microeconomics (SoCCAM) for
valuable comments. We also thank everyone at the UT Dallas Research Center who have helped us get
acquainted with the administrative data. The conclusions of this research do not necessarily reflect the
opinions or official position of the Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board, the Texas Workforce Commission, or the state of Texas. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number (#1824547) and a grant from the
American Educational Research Association which receives funds for its ”AERA Grants Program” from
the National Science Foundation under NSF award NSF-DRL (#1749275). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or AERA. This project received support
from the Social Security Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Disability Research Consortium.
The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions
or policy of SSA or any agency of the Federal Government. Briana Ballis acknowledges financial support
from the Disability Research Consortium Fellowship from SSA via Mathematica Policy, the National
Science Foundation, and the UC Davis Economics department. Katelyn Heath acknowledges financial
support from the National Academy of Education and the National Academy of Education/Spencer
Dissertation Fellowship Program, the Bronfenbrenner Center for Translational Research, Christopher
Wildeman, Cornell University Graduate School, Cornell Policy Analysis and Management Department,
and the Cornell Economics department Labor Grant.
1 This is computed by multiplying total enrollment in Texas public schools in 2018 (roughly 5 million)

1

Page 2 of 76

2

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

major policy change that caused such a large and sudden change in SE participation for a large representative sample of students. In 2016, more than 10 years
after the policy was implemented, an investigative Houston Chronicle article was
published that alerted the greater public, for the first time, to the existence of
this policy, sparking significant public outcry and debate (Rosenthal 2016). Subsequently, the federal government conducted their own investigation and in 2018
determined that the 8.5 percent district SE target was illegal and in violation of
federal disability law (U.S. Department of Education 2018). The fact that this
policy was illegal highlights why policies such as this one are so rare. We use this
policy change in combination with administrative data from Texas that follows
the universe of public school students into adulthood, to provide the first long-run
causal estimates of losing access to SE programs.
In the United States, SE program participation grew by over 40 percent between
1975 and 2018. Currently, over 13 percent of public school students participate
in SE programs annually, at a cost of $40 billion (National Center for Education
Statistics 2015, Elder et al. forthcoming). A-priori the net-benefits of SE participation are ambiguous. Students are likely to benefit from the individualized
educational support (such as one-on-one tutoring, a classroom aide, therapy, or
standardized testing modifications) that SE offers. However, for students with
less severe conditions there are several reasons why SE participation could be
harmful: being placed in segregated learning environments or held to relatively
lower expectations regarding achievement may inhibit long-run success. While
the purpose of SE is to ameliorate the challenges students with disabilities may
face throughout schooling and later in life, considerable uncertainty surrounds
the effectiveness of SE spending.
Despite significant increases in SE participation, there is little causal evidence
on how SE placement (or lack thereof) affects long-run trajectories of marginal
participants. The main difficulty in evaluating the effectiveness of SE programs
is identifying a plausible counterfactual. Students are selected into SE because
they are at risk of low achievement or poor behavioral outcomes. In addition, SE
inclusion criteria are neither straightforward nor standardized for students with
less severe conditions. Thus, it is not possible to exploit discontinuities in SE
diagnostic criteria to identify the causal impacts of SE participation.2 Instead,
exogenous changes in SE participation are required for causal identification. However, SE eligibility rules were determined federally in 1975 (with minor changes
since), making it difficult to identify variation in SE placement across locations
or over time that is plausibly exogenous.
Our research design exploits pre-policy variation in SE rates across districts
in Texas, which led to significant differences in policy pressure to reduce SE
by the 4.5 percentage point reduction in total SE enrollment that occurred post-policy.
2 For the vast majority of SE students with learning or behavioral impairments, the most common
symptoms are poor academic performance or classroom behaviors. Since many students exhibit these
symptoms occasionally, there are inconsistencies in SE placement based on how teachers, parents, or
diagnosticians perceive these symptoms.

Page 3 of 76

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF SPECIAL EDUCATION

3

enrollment. To identify the direct impacts of SE programs for students with
disabilities, we focus on students who were already enrolled in SE prior to the
policy change and estimate the long-run effect of a reduction in SE access using
two different identification strategies.3 First, we use a difference-in-differences
(DiD) strategy that compares changes in SE removal and educational attainment
in districts with lower versus higher pre-policy SE rates, across cohorts who had
varying levels of time exposed to the policy. This strategy produces estimates of
the average effect of reducing overall access to SE for students with disabilities.
Second, we use exposure to the policy as an instrument for SE removal in an
instrumental variables (IV) framework. This second strategy allows us to identify
the long-run impacts of SE removal for students on the margin of SE placement
decisions, precisely the group for whom the net benefits of SE are most unclear.
Our results suggest that SE students who lose access to SE services experience
significant declines in educational attainment. Our DiD estimates imply that SE
students enrolled in the average district experienced a 3.7 percentage points (or
13 percent) increase in the likelihood of SE removal, a 2.0 percentage points (or
2.7 percent) decrease in the likelihood of high school completion, and a 1.2 percentage points (or 3.6 percent) decrease in the likelihood of college enrollment
after the policy’s introduction.4 We show that these declines in SE participation and educational attainment are mostly driven by SE students who already
spent the majority of their day in general education (GE) classrooms and who
had relatively mild disability types.5 For students on the margin of SE placement decisions, our IV estimates imply that SE removal decreased high school
completion by 51.9 percentage points and college enrollment by 37.9 percentage
points. These large reductions in high school completion and college enrollment
are suggestive that later life labor market outcomes may also be likely to decline.6
Lower-income and minority students experience larger increases in SE removal,
and the negative impact of SE removal on educational attainment is concentrated
among these students.
Why do marginal SE students (i.e. those with relatively mild conditions) experience such large reductions in educational attainment after SE removal? There
are at least two possible explanations. First, SE students may have the option
to satisfy modified high school graduation requirements, which may make educa3 The policy pressure to reduce SE enrollment significantly changed the incentives to classify marginal
students, which in turn changed the underlying conditions of SE students in the post-policy period. This
sample restriction ensures that our results will not be negatively biased as a result of the underlying
changes in the ability of students in SE after the policy change. As we will justify in Section II.B, we
focus on 5th grade SE cohorts, but demonstrate that our results are not sensitive to this grade cohort
restriction.
4 These effect sizes are computed for SE students fully exposed to the policy after 5th grade and
enrolled in the average school district that served 13 percent of their students in SE at baseline.
5 Therefore, throughout this paper when considering students who are removed from SE, we view this
as a removal of services within the GE classroom, rather than a compositional shift of students from SE
classrooms to GE classrooms, for the majority of SE students.
6 However, we leave these results for future work, given that the limited number of post-policy years
has not yet allowed these outcomes to fully realize.

Page 4 of 76

4

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

tional attainment easier. That is, students enrolled in SE may be able to graduate
from high school without passing an exit exam, which is a graduation requirement
for all GE students. Thus, students may mechanically be less likely to graduate
from high school if they no longer have the option of being exempt from the exit
exam. Second, SE students likely benefit from the additional resources and more
focused attention they receive. Therefore, when SE services are removed, students may experience a reduction in learning, which makes it more difficult for
them to complete high school and attain post-secondary schooling.
We find that students who lose access to SE are significantly more likely to
take the high school exit exam, suggesting that this mechanical effect could have
played a role. However, we show that it is unlikely that changes in high school
graduation requirements alone are driving our results. The largest declines in
high school completion are driven by students who would have been very likely to
take the exit exam regardless of the policy, likely ruling out a purely mechanical
effect.7 Moreover, the long-run negative impacts of SE removal are larger for
students in lower-resourced districts. This highlights the potential importance
of additional SE resources, especially in districts with fewer available resources
to prepare students with special needs for adulthood. Finally, it is important to
highlight that we are estimating SE program effects based on SE removal. Longrun responses for students who never participate in SE, but would have in the
absence of the policy, may not mirror the impacts of SE removal. For instance,
those never enrolled in SE do not incur any potential stigma associated with
a disability label and do not become accustomed to additional supports during
school. However, we are not able to identify students in the post-policy period
who would have been in SE in the absence of the policy, but are now not.
Even though the policy was targeted towards SE students, limiting access to SE
programs could have affected all students in Texas public schools. For instance,
GE students could have experienced spillover effects resulting from their SE peers
losing access to services. Additionally, GE students could have been directly
impacted by the policy as a result of being less likely to gain access to SE in
later grades themselves. Therefore, we also estimate the effects of this policy
on a sample of GE students using a similar DiD model.8 We find smaller and
less precise declines in educational attainment among GE students due to the
policy pressure to reduce SE enrollment. Our DiD estimates imply that GE
students enrolled in the average district experienced a 1 percentage point (or 1.6
percent) decline in the likelihood of enrolling in college. We do not find that
policy exposure led to significant declines in high school completion among GE
7 We do not find changes in the likelihood of taking or passing the exit exam for students predicted to
be very likely to take the exit exam regardless of the policy. Although we caveat that SE students who
took and failed the exit exam in the absence of the policy still could have been eligible to graduate. We
expand in Section V.A however, that this caveat is likely not large enough to fully account for declines
in high school completion as a result of the policy.
8 We compare changes in educational attainment for GE students in districts with lower versus higher
pre-policy SE rates across cohorts, who had varying levels of time exposed to the policy. Here, the sample
is students who are in GE as of 5th grade prior to policy implementation.

Page 5 of 76

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

THE LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF SPECIAL EDUCATION

5

students, although the point estimate is negative. We do not expect these effects
on GE students are a result of increases in classroom size, since SE removal was
driven by those who were already educated in GE classrooms for the majority
of the school day. Instead, we interpret these results as suggestive evidence that
the additional resources SE programs bring to GE classrooms may have positive
spillover effects on GE students.9 In addition, greater access to SE programs is
likely to directly benefit all students by ensuring that SE services are appropriately
allocated throughout schooling.
Credibly estimating the long-run impacts of SE programs is difficult due to
data limitations and the empirical challenges previously noted. The few studies
that have examined SE placement have largely focused on short-run outcomes
and mostly find positive effects. Various identification strategies have been used
in an attempt to account for the endogenous placement of students into SE.
For example, using within student changes, Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2002)
find that SE participation improves math performance for students with mild
learning and behavioral conditions. Using strategic placement in SE due to an
accountability policy that placed pressure on schools to improve overall student
performance, Cohen (2007) finds that SE participation reduces absenteeism for
marginal low-achieving students.10 Only one paper, Prenovitz (2017), finds that
SE participation harms student achievement. However, this deviation from prior
studies is likely driven by the context that she focuses on, which resulted in strategic SE placements for students most unlikely to benefit from SE.11 An important
caveat for these studies is that estimating the effects of SE participation on standardized exam performance could produce mechanically negative results, since SE
students often take modified or accommodated versions of the exams. Moreover,
these previous studies offer little insight into the role of SE participation on adult
outcomes. To date, the only evidence on the long-run impacts of SE has been
descriptive and focused on small samples (Newman et al. 2011).
We contribute to the literature in several important ways. First, we utilize
linked administrative data to offer, to our knowledge, the first long-run causal
impacts of SE participation for marginal students. Second, our focus on a unique
policy change that led to the largest exogenous reduction in SE participation
to-date allows us to isolate changes in SE access without having to make strong
identification assumptions. Third, since we use population data from Texas, a
large and diverse state, we are able to estimate differential responses to SE access
9 SE resources could directly or indirectly benefit GE students. It is likely that additional resources
in the GE classroom, such as teacher’s aides, small group work, and extra time on tests improves SE
students’ focus and attention, thereby reducing behavioral challenges that could have negative spillover
effects on GE students. However, these resources may also directly benefit GE students if for example,
teacher’s aides are are able to help both GE and SE students in the classroom.
10 Cohen (2007) also finds suggestive evidence that SE placement reduces the probability of dropping
out and improves GPA, but these results are not significant at conventional levels.
11 Specifically, Prenovitz (2017) infers SE program effects based on the introduction of No Child Left
Behind (NCLB), which held schools accountable for SE subgroup performance. In this setting, schools
faced incentives to assign SE to higher-achieving students and remove SE services for lower-achieving
students.

