Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs.
Responsiveness
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0680.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: Business Dynamism; Productivity

Page 1 of 77

Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness
Disclosure Statement
Ryan A. Decker
Mailstop 82
th
20 Street and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
(202) 452-2478
ryan.a.decker@frb.gov
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper.

Page 2 of 77

John Haltiwanger:
In compliance with the requirement of the Journal’s disclosure policy, I provide the following
information. I have received financial support for my research in the form of grants from the
following organizations over the last three years: Kauffman Foundation, Russell Sage
Foundation, Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation. The support from the
Kauffman Foundation is directly related to this research as they have supported the development
of the data infrastructure used in this paper as well as research analysis related to the topics in
this paper. The other grant support is not directly related to the research reported here.

Page 3 of 77

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Economics and Statistics Administration

U.S. Census Bureau

Washington, DC 20233-0001
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

August 1, 2020

MEMORANDUM FOR:

AEA Journals

FROM:

Ron S. Jarmin

SUBJECT:

Disclosure State:!

17.A /

I have no relevant or material financial interests relating to the research described "Changing Business
Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness". I'm a named Co-Pl in grants from the
Kauffman Foundation that support Aspects of this work. I receive no financial support from those
grants.

USCENSUSBUREAU
Helping You Make Informed Decisions

www.census.gov

Page 4 of 77

American Economic Review
AEA Publications
2403 Sidney Street, Suite 260
Pittsburgh, PA 15203
Dear Editors:
In compliance with the requirement of the Journal’s disclosure policy, I would like to state that I, Javier
Miranda, am an employee of the U.S. Census Bureau. I have received no direct financial support from
any organization but I am one of the Principal Investigators on the grant from the Kauffman Foundation
that we note in the acknowledgements section. The support from the Kauffman Foundation is directly
related to this research as they have supported the development of the data infrastructure used in this
paper as well as research analysis related to the topics in this paper. We are also using proprietary data
in this paper housed at the U.S. Bureau of the Census. As we note in the acknowledgements section
“All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.”
Sincerely,

Javier Miranda
Principal Economist
Center for Economic Studies
US Census Bureau

Page 5 of 77

Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity:
Shocks vs. Responsiveness
By RYAN A. DECKER, JOHN HALTIWANGER, RON S. JARMIN, AND JAVIER
MIRANDA*
The pace of job reallocation has declined in the U.S. in recent
decades.

We draw insight from canonical models of business

dynamics in which reallocation can decline due to (a) lower
dispersion of idiosyncratic shocks faced by businesses, or (b) weaker
marginal responsiveness of businesses to shocks. We show that shock
dispersion has actually risen, while the responsiveness of businesslevel employment to productivity has weakened. Moreover, declining
responsiveness can account for a significant fraction of the decline in
the pace of job reallocation, and we find suggestive evidence this has
been a drag on aggregate productivity.

* Federal Reserve Board, University of Maryland and NBER, U.S. Census Bureau, and U.S. Census Bureau, respectively.
John Haltiwanger is also a Schedule A part-time employee of the U.S. Census Bureau at the time of the writing of this
paper. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Kauffman Foundation. Cody Tuttle provided excellent
research assistance. We thank John Abowd, Rudi Bachmann, Martin Baily, Jonathan Baker, Dave Byrne, Chris Foote,
Lucia Foster, Clément Gorin, Bronwyn Hall, Matthias Kehrig, Pete Klenow, Kristin McCue, three anonymous referees, the
journal editor, and conference or seminar participants at the 2015 Atlanta Fed Conference on Secular Changes in Labor
Markets, the ASSA 2016 meetings, the 2016 Brookings “productivity puzzle” conference, the 3rd International ZEW
conference, the 2016 ICC conference, BYU, University of Chicago, Drexel University, the Federal Reserve Board, the
Richmond Fed, the spring 2017 Midwest Macro meetings, the 2017 UNC IDEA conference, and the 2017 NBER Summer
Institute meetings for helpful comments. We are grateful for the use of the manufacturing productivity database developed
in Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2016) as well as the revenue productivity database developed in Haltiwanger et al.
(2017). Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau or of the Board of Governors or its staff. The statistics reported in this paper have been
reviewed and approved by the Disclosure Review Board of the Bureau of the Census (DRB-B0029-CED-20190314, DRBB0056-CED-20190529, CBDRB-FY20-138).

1

