Job Seekers' Perceptions and Employment Prospects:
Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0808.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: E24, J64, D84

Page 1 of 160

DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
2225 Speedway Stop C3100 • Austin, Texas 78712-1690 • (512) 471-3510
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/economics

July 27, 2020
Disclosure Statement regarding paper “Job Seekers' Perceptions and Employment
Prospects: Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias”
To whom it may concern:
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
Sincerely yours,

Andreas I. Mueller
Associate Professor
The University of Texas at Austin
andimueller@utexas.edu

Page 2 of 160

July 28, 2020

Disclosure Statement regarding paper “Job Seekers' Perceptions and Employment Prospects:
Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias”

To whom it may concern:

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper.

Sincerely,

Johannes Spinnewijn
Associate Professor
London School of Economics
j.spinnewijn@lse.ac.uk

Page 3 of 160

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK
33 LIBERTY STREET
NEW YORK, N.Y. 10045-0001
Telephone 212 720-5000

July 27, 2020

Disclosure Statement regarding paper “Job Seekers' Perceptions and Employment
Prospects: Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias”
To whom it may concern:
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
Sincerely yours,

Giorgio Topa
Vice President
Research and Statistics Group
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Page 4 of 160

Job Seekers’ Perceptions and Employment Prospects:
Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias∗
Andreas I. Mueller
UT Austin, NBER,
CEPR and IZA

Johannes Spinnewijn
LSE and CEPR

Giorgio Topa
FRBNY and IZA

August 2, 2020

Abstract
This paper uses job seekers’ elicited beliefs about job finding to disentangle the sources of the decline
in job-finding rates by duration of unemployment. We document that beliefs have strong predictive
power for job finding, but are not revised downward when remaining unemployed and are subject to
optimistic bias, especially for the long-term unemployed. Leveraging the predictive power of beliefs,
we find substantial heterogeneity in job finding with the resulting dynamic selection explaining most
of the observed negative duration dependence in job finding. Moreover, job seekers’ beliefs under-react
to heterogeneity in job finding, distorting search behavior and increasing long-term unemployment.

∗

We thank Ned Augenblick, Raj Chetty, Stefano DellaVigna, Erik Eyster, Manolis Galenianos, Francois Gerard, Martin
Hackman, Nathan Hendren, Greg Kaplan, Peter Kuhn, Atilla Lindner, Brendan Price, Matthew Rabin, Emmanuel Saez,
Dan Silverman, Dmitry Taubinsky and Basit Zafar, and seminar participants at CalPoly, CEMFI, Harvard, LSE, NYFed,
UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA, UC Santa Barbara, UC San Diego, AEA Meetings San Diego, NBER Summer Institute, the
T2M conference, TEC conference and EM3C conference for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Luis Armona,
Jack Fisher, Nicole Gorton, Raymond Lim, Prakash Mishra, Anushka Mitra, Thomas Monk, Mathilde Muñoz, Will Parker,
Ashesh Rambachan and Lauren Thomas for their excellent research assistance. Johannes Spinnewijn acknowledges financial
support from ERC grant 716485. The views expressed here are our own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or those of the Federal Reserve System.

1

Page 5 of 160

1

Introduction

A critical challenge for unemployment policy is the high incidence of long-term unemployment. While
long unemployment durations and a large share of long-term unemployed have been a common phenomenon in European countries (see Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] and Machin and Manning [1999]),
the Great Recession has imported this concern to the US as well (Kroft et al. [2016]) and it is likely to
be reinforced given the sharp increase in unemployment following the COVID-19 pandemic. The consequences of job loss can be large, but especially so for people who get stuck in long spells of unemployment
(e.g., Jacobson et al. [1993], Kolsrud et al. [2018]). Moreover, the high incidence of long-term unemployment seems indicative of substantial frictions in the search and matching process (e.g., Clark and
Summers [1979]) and can contribute to the persistence of employment shocks (e.g., Pissarides [1992]).
A ubiquitous empirical finding in the literature is the observed depreciation in job-finding rates by
duration of unemployment. As it is crucial for formulating policy responses, understanding why employment prospects are worse for the long-term unemployed has been the topic of a long literature.1 In
theory, long-term unemployment may reduce a worker’s chances to find a job (e.g., due to skill depreciation or duration-based employer screening), but less employable workers also select into long-term
unemployment. Empirically, separating the role of duration-dependent forces from heterogeneity across
job seekers has been a challenge until today. Since the seminal work by Lancaster [1979] and Heckman
and Singer [1984] among others, several studies have tried to estimate or calibrate the contribution of
different forces to the observed negative duration dependence in exit rates out of unemployment. Direct
evidence on the potential role of heterogeneity has been particularly limited.2
This paper takes a novel approach to address this question, using newly available data on unemployed job seekers’ perceptions about their employment prospects together with actual labor market
transitions. We present a conceptual framework that takes advantage of our ability to jointly observe job
seekers’ perceptions and actual job finding to identify heterogeneity in true job-finding rates and separate dynamic selection from true duration dependence in explaining the observed decline in job finding.
The key idea underlying identification in this framework is that the covariance between perceptions and
actual job finding helps uncovering the extent of ex-ante heterogeneity in true job-finding probabilities.
The predictable variation in job finding provides a lower bound on the ex-ante heterogeneity in job
finding. Beliefs can also be used in combination with a model that relates job seekers’ elicited beliefs
to their job-finding probability to estimate the heterogeneity in the latter. This builds on recent work
using risk elicitations to estimate heterogeneity in ex-ante risks in Hendren [2013, 2017].
Our analysis goes further in two important dimensions. Both are key to uncover the heterogeneity
in job finding that contributes to the observed duration dependence and are relevant by themselves.
First, in addition to idiosyncratic error in the beliefs (Hendren [2013]), we allow job seekers’ beliefs to
systematically over- or under-react to differences in job finding, either across job seekers or over the
1

See Shimer and Werning [2006], Pavoni [2009] and Kolsrud et al. [2018] for the consequences for the design of the
unemployment benefit profile. See Pavoni and Violante [2007], Spinnewijn [2013] and Wunsch [2013] for the consequences
on the design of workfare, job search assistance and training programs.
2
For a review of the relevant literature, see Machin and Manning [1999] who write: ‘To conclude, it does not really seem
possible in practice to identify separately the effect of heterogeneity from that of [true] duration dependence without making
some very strong assumptions about functional form which have no foundation in any economic theory.’ See Kroft et al.
[2013], Alvarez et al. [2016], Jarosch and Pilossoph [2018] and Farber et al. [2018] for recent examples in this literature.

2

