Closing the Gap: The Effect of Reducing Complexity and
Uncertainty in College Pricing on the Choices of Low-Income
Students
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2020-0451.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I0, I23, I24

Page 1 of 85

C LOSING THE G AP :
T HE E FFECT OF R EDUCING C OMPLEXITY AND
U NCERTAINTY IN C OLLEGE P RICING ON THE C HOICES OF
L OW-I NCOME S TUDENTS
S USAN DYNARSKI
University of Michigan and NBER
C.J. L IBASSI
College Board
K ATHERINE M ICHELMORE
Syracuse University
S TEPHANIE OWEN*
University of Michigan
January 5, 2021
Abstract
High-achieving, low-income students attend selective colleges at far lower rates than upper-income
students with similar achievement. Behavioral biases, intensified by complexity and uncertainty in the
admissions and aid process, may explain this gap. In a large-scale experiment we test an early commitment
of free tuition at a flagship university. The intervention did not increase aid: rather, students were guaranteed
before application the same grant aid that they would qualify for in expectation if admitted. The offer
substantially increased application (68 percent vs 26 percent) and enrollment rates (27 percent vs 12 percent).
The results suggest that uncertainty, present bias, and loss aversion loom large in students’ college decisions.

JEL codes: I0,I21,I22,I23,I24,I28

* Corresponding author: dynarski@umich.edu.735 State St. #5132, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Author contact: clibassi@collegeboard.org
(Libassi); kmmichel@maxwell.syr.edu (Michelmore); srowen@umich.edu (Owen). This project would not have been possible without
our collaborators at the University of Michigan, particularly Kedra Ishop, Steve Lonn, and Betsy Brown. We are grateful to the Michigan
Department of Education (MDE) and Michigan’s Center for Educational Performance and Information (CEPI) for providing data.
Seminar participants at Boston University, Clemson, Cornell, Harvard, Northwestern, University of Illinois, University of Virginia,
Princeton, Chicago, Stanford, the National Bureau for Economic Research, and Syracuse provided helpful comments, while Michael
Lovenheim and Sarah Turner generously read initial drafts. The Institute of Education Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(through Grants R305E100008 and R305B110001), Arnold Ventures, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the University of Michigan
Provost’s Office funded this research. This study is registered at the randomized trial registry of the American Economics Association
under RCT ID AEARCTR-0001831, with DOI 10.1257/rct.1831. A pre-analysis plan was filed in April 2017 (Dynarski et al., 2017).
The code for replicability purposes has been deposited in the AEA Data and Code Repository, openicpsr-130286. This research was
approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Michigan (ID: HUM00096289 ) and Syracuse University (ID: 16-264).
Elizabeth Burland, Meghan Oster, and Shwetha Raghuraman provided outstanding research assistance. This research uses data structured
and maintained by the Michigan Education Data Center (MEDC) (Michigan Department of Education 2020a; Michigan Department of
Education 2020b). MEDC data is modified for analysis purposes using rules governed by MEDC and are not identical to those data
collected and maintained by MDE and/or CEPI. Results, information and opinions solely represent the analysis, information and opinions
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by, or reflect the views or positions of, grantors, MDE and CEPI or any employee thereof.

Page 2 of 85

Gaps in educational attainment between low- and high-income students are large and have grown in
recent decades. Among children born in the 1980s, those from the bottom quartile of family incomes are
50 percentage points less likely to attend college than those from the top quartile. And while 54 percent of
children born into the top income quartile earn a bachelor’s degree, only nine percent of those in the lowest
quartile do so (Bailey and Dynarski, 2011).
These differences stem in part from disparities in academic preparation. But even among well-prepared
students, there are substantial gaps in college enrollment and the quality of college attended (Hoxby and
Avery, 2012). The under-representation of low-income students at selective colleges likely exacerbates both
educational and income inequality.1 While there is no experimental evidence on the effect of college quality,
several studies suggest that attending a college of higher quality (e.g., a flagship instead of a less-selective
four-year school or a community college) increases both educational attainment and earnings (Hoekstra 2009;
Zimmerman 2014; Dillon and Smith 2018).
Among high-achieving students, it is application behavior that drives income differences in college
quality. Hoxby and Avery (2012) find that the majority of low-income, high-achieving students apply to
zero selective schools, even though doing so would likely lower their costs (Cohodes and Goodman, 2014),
increase their chances of completing a college degree, and increase their future wages (Hoekstra 2009,
Zimmerman 2014; Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim 2016).
Standard models of human capital investment fall short in explaining these behaviors. Though a
lack of information about the (net) cost of college or suitability for an elite school could in theory lead
low-income students to underinvest in education, previous interventions targeting these information frictions
have shown only modest success (Bettinger et al. 2012; Hoxby and Turner 2013; Bergman, Denning and
Manoli 2019; Gurantz et al. 2019; Hyman 2020, although see Jensen (2010) for an exception). Insights
from behavioral economics suggest that students’ choices deviate from the classical model in predictable
ways. Many observed behavioral patterns, such as present bias, overreliance on routine or defaults, and
debt aversion, are particularly pronounced for those facing economic scarcity (as are low-income students)
and complex decisions (as presented by the higher education and financial aid systems) (Mullainathan and
Shafir, 2013). Within such an environment, small changes in choice architecture can lead to large changes in
behavior.
We use a randomized, controlled trial to test whether targeted, personalized communications, which
reframe but do not increase financial aid, can alter the college decisions of low-income students. The
intervention, the “HAIL (High Achieving Involved Leader) Scholarship,”2 was designed in the spirit of
previous interventions that make small changes to the framework of decision-making.
We collaborated with the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, the state’s most selective college,

1 We interchangeably use the terms “high quality”, “selective”, and “elite" throughout to refer to selective institutions. Such schools
tend to spend more per student, as well as enroll high-achieving students who are inputs into the education production function (Black
and Smith 2006).
2 The acronym “HAIL” is a reference to the University of Michigan’s fight song. “HAIL Michigan” is plastered on t-shirts, bumper
stickers, water bottles, tube tops, underwear, beer coolers, dog coats, and billboards across the state and beyond. Go Blue!

1

Page 3 of 85

in this study.3 In the Fall of 2015 and 2016, we sent personalized mailings to high-achieving, low-income
seniors in Michigan’s public high schools. The mailings encouraged students to apply to the university and
pledged four years of free tuition and fees to those admitted.4 Parents of these students also were mailed a
letter about this offer, and their school principals were notified by email.
In each of two cohorts of rising seniors, we identified roughly 2,000 high-achieving, low-income
students at the state’s public schools. These students attended 500 different high schools. We randomized
treatment at the school level, since we expected there would be spillovers that would have biased a within-school
design. Half of the 500 schools were assigned to treatment and half to control.
We identified students for the intervention using administrative data from the Michigan Department of
Education (MDE) (Michigan Department of Education 2020a; Michigan Department of Education 2020b).
We targeted those who qualified for subsidized school meals, the only proxy for income available in these
data. All students in Michigan’s public high schools are required to take the SAT (until 2016, the ACT),
which is used by the state to satisfy federal testing requirements. The SAT is administered for free, during
the school day, at students’ own schools. We focused on students whose scores and grades (contained in the
state data) made them reasonable targets for recruitment according to our research partners in the University
of Michigan admissions office (the criteria are detailed in Section II).
We find very large effects of the intervention offer on application and enrollment rates at the University
of Michigan and, more generally, on college choice. The likelihood of applying to the University of Michigan
more than doubled, from 26 percent among controls to 68 percent among students offered treatment. The
share enrolling at a highly selective college also more than doubled, from 13 percent to 28 percent, with this
effect operating completely through enrollment at the University of Michigan.
We find that one-quarter of the enrollment effect (four percentage points) is driven by students who
would not have attended any college in the absence of the treatment. The balance would have attended a
community college or a less selective four-year college. The offer of the scholarship diverted no students
from colleges as or more selective than the University of Michigan—that is, there was no “poaching” from
other selective schools. Nor did the offer increase attendance at other selective schools, a plausible effect of
mailings that told students that they were strong candidates for admission to the University of Michigan.
The magnitudes of these effects are much larger than those in previous interventions with similar
goals (Bettinger et al. 2012; Hoxby and Turner 2013; Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016; Bergman, Denning and
Manoli 2017; Gurantz et al. 2019; Oreopoulos and Ford 2019; Hyman 2020). Several dimensions of the
HAIL intervention set it apart, and plausibly explain the size of its effect.
The HAIL Scholarship provides an early, unconditional guarantee of free tuition. The early nature of
the offer locks in a price guarantee at the time of the application decision. The four-year guarantee reduces the
uncertainty of future college costs, by converting the likely prospect of aid into a guarantee. Previous research
3 Barron’s ranks schools from “least competitive” to “most competitive” based on a combination of average GPA, SAT scores, and
acceptance rates. The University of Michigan is in the “highly competitive” or second highest category.
4 The HAIL scholarship offer was not a guarantee of admission to the University of Michigan and admissions officers were not
informed about which students received the HAIL scholarship offer. HAIL students who applied to the University of Michigan went
through the standard admissions process.

2

Page 4 of 85

suggests that information is most effective when delivered at the time of decision making (Fernandes, Lynch Jr
and Netemeyer 2014; Fischer and Wagner 2018; Patterson, Pope and Feudo 2019).
The offer is unconditional: while students must still apply and be admitted, they do not have to fill out
any paperwork or go through any verification to qualify for the scholarship.5 Although the costs of learning
about and applying for financial aid are small compared to its value (and the benefits of college), previous
research suggests that even minor and short-term costs can have an outsize influence on the decisions of
myopic students (Hoxby and Turner 2013; Bulman 2015; Pallais 2015; Goodman 2016; Oreopoulos and Ford
2019).
The HAIL offer effectively changes the default option for students, in that no action is required to
accept it. Previous research indicates that people use shortcuts in complex decision environments, and that
changing defaults can therefore dramatically influence behavior ( Johnson and Goldstein 2009; Beshears et al.
2013; Pallais 2015; Marx and Turner 2019).
The intervention, in the end, did not substantively alter the cost of attending the University of Michigan.
Students in the treatment and control groups who enrolled at the university wound up with virtually identical
aid packages.6 The University of Michigan meets the financial need (as defined by national aid formulas)
of all of its students. Those with incomes as low as those in our sample almost invariably qualify for free
tuition and fees, as well as for living expenses. Because of these pre-existing policies, the HAIL guarantee
was rarely binding on the University. The behavioral changes induced by the guarantee indicate that certainty,
while virtually costless to the school, was extremely valuable to potential students.
Our results show that a low-cost intervention that removes behavioral and administrative obstacles
can profoundly alter student choices. We add to a growing body of research that shows that seemingly minor
differences in policy design can have profound effects on real economic outcomes. In ongoing work, we
track the effects of the intervention on college major, persistence, and graduation. In the long term, we will
examine the effect of the induced changes in educational attainment on earnings and other measures of adult
well-being.

I

BACKGROUND

A Income Gaps in College Quality and Why They Matter
A long literature informs the design of the HAIL scholarship and our understanding of income-based
gaps in college going.
Just 12 percent of college students come from the bottom fifth of the family-income distribution, while
28 percent are from the top fifth. This imbalance is even larger at the most selective colleges (Chetty et al.
2017)7 , which have more students from the top one percent of the income distribution than from the entire
5 While submitting aid forms was not required to receive the HAIL Scholarship, applicants were encouraged to do so. University of
Michigan staff prodded students to complete forms, and 99 percent of HAIL Scholars who enrolled at the University of Michigan did so,
which substantially increased their aid.
6 Note that this comparison, while informative, does not have a causal interpretation, since the treatment increased the likelihood of
attending the university.
7 The authors refer to these institutions as the “Ivy Plus” and include the eight Ivy League schools plus MIT, Stanford, Duke, and the

3

Page 5 of 85

bottom half.
Undermatching accounts for some of this gap in college selectivity. Students are said to undermatch
when they are much more academically qualified than typical peers at their chosen school. Only 38 percent
of Chicago Public Schools students who qualify for very selective colleges attend one (Roderick, Coca and
Nagaoka, 2011). Similarly, Bowen, Chingos and McPherson (2009) found that, among students in North
Carolina in 1999, 40 percent did not attend the highest-tier institution for which they were likely eligible
given their academic performance. This concurs with a study of two nationally-representative cohorts of high
school graduates from 1992 and 2004 (Smith, Pender and Howell, 2013).
Hoxby and Avery (2012) and Dillon and Smith (2017) find that the main driver of mismatch is student
application choices rather than schools’ admissions decisions. That is, low-income students wind up at
schools of lower selectivity not because they were rejected by the better schools but because they never
applied to them. Dillon and Smith (2017) find that, among the students who undermatch, 72 percent applied
to no closely matched college; just six percent applied to such colleges but were rejected. Hoxby and Avery
(2012) show that many qualified students apply to no selective colleges at all.
In Michigan, as in the rest of the country, there are large differences in college choices between
low- and higher-income students. Among students whose high academic achievement makes them plausible
candidates for a selective school, low-income students (defined as those eligible for federally-subsidized
school meals) are four percentage points less likely to attend any college than their higher-income peers (see
Figure 1). Gaps in college selectivity are even wider than gaps in college attendance: low-income students
are eight percentage points less likely than more advantaged peers to attend a highly selective school.
More selective schools typically offer more aid to low-income students, making them cheaper than
less selective schools (see Table 1). The net cost of attendance at the University of Michigan for in-state
students with family income below $30,000 is $3,249.8 This makes the University of Michigan the cheapest
four-year option for low-income students in the state; their net cost of attendance is $7,058 at Michigan State
University, and $12,316 at Eastern Michigan University. For students with slightly higher family income
(between $30,000 and $48,000), the net cost of attendance at the University of Michigan is $5,575.9 For these
students, only a community college is a cheaper option than the University of Michigan (nearby Washetenaw
Community college costs $4,455).10
Higher college quality is associated with higher graduation rates and salaries. Research indicates that
at least part of this relationship is causal (Hoekstra 2009; Zimmerman 2014; Dillon and Smith 2018). The
University of Michigan has a 91 percent graduation rate (within six years) and an average alumni salary of over
$63,000 (within ten years of attendance). The comparable statistics at nearby Eastern Michigan University
are 41 percent and $39,300. Shifting low-income students to the University of Michigan is therefore likely to
University of Chicago.
8 From College Scorecard data.
9 This is roughly 130-185 percent of the federal poverty threshold for a family of four, and corresponds to the upper income thresholds
for free or subsidized meals in school.
10 Table 1 includes four illustrative schools, but the point holds more broadly. For students in the two lowest income categories, the
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor is the most affordable bachelor’s-degree-granting school in the state.

4

