Waning Immunity and the Second Wave: Some Projections
for SARS-CoV-2
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0343.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
10-Nov-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Giannitsarou, Chryssi; University of Cambridge, Faculty of Economics
Kissler, Stephen; Harvard University T H Chan School of Public Health
Toxvaerd, Flavio; University of Cambridge, Faculty of Economics
Keywords: COVID-19, social distancing, waning immunity

Page 1 of 40

Disclosure Statement
November 10, 2020
Re. AERI-2020-0343.R2, titled ‘Waning Immunity and the Second Wave: Some
Projections for SARS-CoV-2’
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.

Chryssi Giannitsarou
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge

Page 2 of 40

Disclosure Statement
November 10, 2020
Re. AERI-2020-0343.R2, titled ‘Waning Immunity and the Second Wave: Some
Projections for SARS-CoV-2’
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.

Stephen Kissler
Harvard School of Public Health

Page 3 of 40

Disclosure Statement
November 10, 2020
Re. AERI-2020-0343.R2, titled ‘Waning Immunity and the Second Wave: Some
Projections for SARS-CoV-2’
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.

Flavio Toxvaerd
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge

Page 4 of 40

Waning Immunity and the Second Wave:
Some Projections for SARS-CoV-2
By C HRYSSI G IANNITSAROU , S TEPHEN K ISSLER AND F LAVIO T OXVAERD
This paper offers projections of future transmission dynamics for SARSCoV-2 in an SEIRS model with demographics and waning immunity. In
a stylized optimal control setting calibrated to the USA, we show that
the disease is endemic in steady state and that its dynamics are characterized by damped oscillations. The magnitude of the oscillations depends on how fast immunity wanes. The optimal social distancing policy
both curbs peak prevalence and postpones the infection waves relative
to the uncontrolled dynamics. Last, we perform sensitivity analysis with
respect to the duration of immunity, the infection fatality rate and the
planning horizon.
JEL: E61, I18.
Keywords: COVID-19, economic epidemiology, social distancing, waning immunity, demographics, infection control, SEIRS.
The 20th century witnessed a dramatic transition in the burden from infectious diseases. In the USA, the yearly mortality rate per 100,000 population fell from around
800 in the early 1900s to about 50 by mid-century (Armstrong, Conn and Pinner, 1999,
Hansen et al., 2016). These gains in public health were made possible by a series of significant innovations, not least by the development of treatments and vaccines. Since the
1950s, these mortality rates have remained relatively stable, despite increases in deaths
due to diseases such as HIV/AIDS in the 1980s. This relative stability of mortality
numbers over the past decades may have lead to complacency, with many advanced
economies still ill-equipped to contain large-scale epidemics. Yet as is now clear, societies must confront the difficult question of how to best organize themselves in a world
where new infectious diseases keep appearing and may remain endemic. A case in
point is COVID-19, which is causing devastating health and economic effects around
the world.
Much recent research on COVID-19 resorts to modelling the economic control of infection with variations of the classical SIR framework, in which recovery from the disease confers permanent immunity. Yet according to the WHO, “There is currently no
evidence that people who have recovered from COVID-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection.” This is important, because much of current policy is
Giannitsarou: Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge and CEPR. Email: cg349@cam.ac.uk. Kissler:
Harvard School of Public Health. Email: skissler@hsph.harvard.edu. Toxvaerd: Faculty of Economics, University of
Cambridge. Email: fmot2@cam.ac.uk. We thank Andy Atkeson for constructive discussions, and our editor Pete Klenow
and three anonymous referees for useful feedback and suggestions. We also benefited from conversations with Elisa
Faraglia and Miltos Makris. The first draft of this paper was written during lockdown in April and May 2020. We thank
our offspring Isabel and Nefeli for their patience and support during difficult times.
1

Page 5 of 40

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

based on the assumption that herd immunity will eventually set in. The focus on getting
through the first wave of the epidemic potentially leaves us exposed and unprepared to
what comes after, if immunity wanes over time. At the time of writing, we still lack a
vaccine or treatments that clearly reduce mortality from SARS-CoV-2, although there
is cautious optimism that some pharmaceutical innovations may be on the horizon. Regardless, imperfect vaccine efficacy and incomplete coverage may alter the dynamics of
the disease without fully eradicating it. Thus we may have to rely on some combination
of non-pharmaceutical interventions and innovate on how we structure work and social
life for the foreseeable future.
In this paper, we analyze optimal social distancing measures using a stylized yet flexible epidemic model with population turnover and waning immunity. We calibrate the
model to the USA and perform comparative analysis with different assumptions about the
waning period and disease-induced death rates. The calibrated epidemiological model
has three important properties. First, with inflows to the population through births or
migration, the disease becomes endemic. This means that if left uncontrolled, it will
never be eradicated, in contrast to a closed population model in which recovery confers
permanent immunity. Second, the path to the endemic steady state displays damped oscillations, which are intrinsic to the disease dynamics and unrelated to temporal forcing
or time-varying behavior. Third, the periodicity of the oscillations and the speed of convergence to steady state depend on how fast immunity wanes. For this model, we find
that it is optimal to have strict social distancing measures from the onset of the epidemic
and which are continued for several months. These are then temporarily relaxed before
being brought back at the start of the second wave, and subsequently maintained at a
permanent moderate level. This policy achieves two goals: it suppresses and postpones
the initial large infection wave, and delays all future waves as much as possible.
The fundamental difference between the models with permanent and waning immunity is that in the latter, the build-up of susceptibles happens faster, thereby generating
additional waves of infection and deaths in the short and medium run. Waning immunity
is thus similar to increasing the mortality of the disease relative to the case of permanent
immunity. Optimal policy is sensitive to this difference and therefore prescribes stricter
social distancing measures under waning immunity.
We also perform sensitivity analysis with respect to the speed at which immunity
wanes and the infection fatality rate (IFR). For the calibrated benchmark and with immunity waning after one year, moderate changes in the two parameters change the policy
in an intuitive manner; higher IFR and faster loss of immunity both increase the severity
of the disease and prompt stricter measures to be imposed. But for very fast loss of immunity or high IFR, there is a qualitative shift and the optimal policy no longer leads to
an endemic steady state. Instead, significant and permanent social distancing is imposed
from the outset, resulting in asymptotic eradication of the disease.
The recent literature on the economics of the COVID-19 epidemic is too vast to do justice in this space; for reference, we therefore mention just a few examples. Eichenbaum,
Rebelo and Trabandt (2020), Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020) and Krueger, Ulhig and Xie (2020) all consider macroeconomic models in

