Pay Me Later: Savings Constraints and the Demand for
Deferred Payments
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-1657.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords:

savings constraints, income timing, commitment savings, direct deposit,
labor supply, D14, J22, J33, O12, O15

Page 1 of 84

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Pay Me Later: Savings Constraints and the Demand for Deferred Payments”
January 15, 2021
Eric Chyn declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
This study was reviewed and approved by IRBs in Malawi (NCRSH, protocol # P.08/16/131)
and at Innovations for Poverty Action (protocol # 13888).

Page 2 of 84

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Pay Me Later: Savings Constraints and the Demand for Deferred Payments”
January 15, 2021
Jason Kerwin declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
This study was reviewed and approved by IRBs in Malawi (NCRSH, protocol # P.08/16/131)
and at Innovations for Poverty Action (protocol # 13888).

Page 3 of 84

Disclosure Statement
Manuscript: “Pay Me Later: Savings Constraints and the Demand for Deferred Payments”
January 15, 2021
Lasse Brune declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
This study was reviewed and approved by IRBs in Malawi (NCRSH, protocol # P.08/16/131)
and at Innovations for Poverty Action (protocol # 13888).

Page 4 of 84

Pay Me Later:
Savings Constraints and the
Demand for Deferred Payments∗
Lasse Brune, Eric Chyn, and Jason Kerwin
January 17, 2021

Abstract
We study a simple savings scheme that allows workers to defer receipt of part
of their wages for three months at zero interest. The scheme significantly increases
savings during the deferral period, leading to higher post-disbursement spending on
lumpy goods. Two years later, after two additional rounds of the savings scheme, we
find that treated workers have made permanent improvements to their homes. The
popularity of the scheme implies a lack of good alternative savings options. The results
of a follow-up experiment suggest that demand for the scheme is partly due to its
ability to address self-control issues.
∗

Brune: Global Poverty Research Lab, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA; lasse.brune@northwestern.edu; Chyn: Department of Economics, Dartmouth College, 6106 Rockefeller Center, Hanover, NH 03755, USA, and NBER; eric.t.chyn@dartmouth.edu; Kerwin:
Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, 1994 Buford Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108,
USA; jkerwin@umn.edu. We are grateful for insightful comments from Achyuta Adhvaryu, Emily Breza,
Lorenzo Casaburi, Michael Callen, Marcel Fafchamps, Xavi Giné, Reshma Hussam, Kelsey Jack, Namrata
Kala, Dean Karlan, Craig McIntosh, Doug Staiger, Chris Woodruff, Dean Yang, Jonathan Zinman, and from
seminar participants at the IPA Researcher Gathering on Financial Inclusion, Yale University, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, the University of Hong Kong, HKUST, Peking University, China Agricultural
University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the University of Utah, the University of Washington,
MIEDC, CSAE, NEUDC, and ASSA. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Financial Services for
the Poor Research Fund at Innovations for Poverty Action, sponsored by a grant from the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation. We thank Rachel Sander for providing excellent research assistance, and Ndema Longwe
for his outstanding diligent work in managing data collection. In addition, we also thank the editor Esther
Duflo and two anonymous referees for detailed comments and feedback. This project would not have been
possible without the help of the management at the Lujeri Tea Estate and the employees who participated
in the study, who generously shared their time with us. This work was supported by the USDA National
Institute of Food and Agriculture, Hatch project MIN14-164. This study was reviewed and approved by
IRBs in Malawi (NCRSH, protocol number P.08/16/131) and at IPA (protocol number 13888). This study
is registered with the AEA RCT Registry under registration number AEARCTR-0001554.

Page 5 of 84

A key prediction of standard economic models is that individuals should prefer to be paid
early. However, an emerging literature documents notable demand for deferred payments for
goods and services in developing countries (Casaburi and Macchiavello, 2019; Brune and
Kerwin, 2019; Kramer and Kunst, 2020). Similarly, millions in developed countries choose to
defer income by opting to overwithhold on tax payments that are later returned as refunds
(Thaler, 1994).
There are three main benefits to deferred payments. First, deferring pay naturally generates lump sums that can be used to purchase durable goods, make business investments,
or buy in bulk. This may be particularly important given qualitative evidence that suggests
poor households exert substantial effort to generate lump sums (Collins et al., 2009). Second,
deferred payments may be a relatively safer savings option because access to high-quality
formal banking is limited and informal saving options can be risky (Karlan, Ratan and Zinman, 2014; Dupas et al., 2016). Third, delaying pay can help address behavioral constraints
such as time-inconsistency (Laibson, 1997; Ashraf, Karlan and Yin, 2006; Bryan, Karlan and
Nelson, 2010; DellaVigna, 2018).
This paper provides evidence on the demand for deferred payments and the first experimental estimates of the impact of this savings method on downstream outcomes. Our
analysis is based on a sample of full-time workers at a large agricultural employer in rural
Malawi. We study a savings scheme that allowed workers to defer a fraction of their pay for
three months at zero interest. Access to this scheme was randomized for a sample of 870
workers who were interested in participating. All payments were provided in cash through
the firm’s regular payroll infrastructure. The scheme created a simple, no-frills option for
workers to save for lumpy purchases by piggybacking on existing firm payroll infrastructure
to shift the timing of payments.
Our analysis shows that the savings scheme was popular and changed worker behavior.
Nearly half of all workers who were contacted as part of outreach activities signed up for
the scheme.1 Those who enrolled had high rates of account usage (92 percent made more
1

We conducted outreach by having field staff visit divisions of the firm. The staff held information sessions
with all permanent, full-time workers who were present on the day of the visit. We did not provide subsidies

1

