The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance Coverage:
Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health, and Labor Market
Outcomes
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2017-1671.R5
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I18, I13, H75

Page 1 of 146

Andrew Goodman-Bacon Disclosure Statement for “The Long-Run Effects of Childhood
Insurance Coverage: Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health and Labor Market
Outcomes”
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.

Page 2 of 146

The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance Coverage:
Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health, and Labor Market
Outcomes
By ANDREW GOODMAN-BACON*
This paper estimates the long-run effects of childhood Medicaid
eligibility on adult health and economic outcomes using the
program’s original introduction (1966-1970) and its mandated
coverage of welfare recipients. The design compares cohorts born in
different years relative to Medicaid implementation, in states with
different pre-existing welfare-based eligibility. Early childhood
Medicaid eligibility reduces mortality and disability, increases
employment, and reduces receipt of disability transfer programs up
to 50 years later. Medicaid has saved the government more than its
original cost and saved more than 10 million quality adjusted lifeyears.

*Goodman-Bacon: Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Ave,
Minneapolis, MN 55401 (e-mail: andrew.goodmanbacon@mpls.frb.org). This project was generously supported by the
Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Scholars program and largely completed while I was an assistant professor at Vanderbilt
University. The collection of data used in this study was partly supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant
number R01 HD069609 and R01 AG040213, and the National Science Foundation under award numbers SES 1157698 and
1623684. I am grateful for helpful comments from Martha Bailey, John Bound, Kitt Carpenter, Bill Collins, John DiNardo,
Valentina Duque, Hilary Hoynes, Bob Kaestner, Brian Kovak, Amanda Kowalski, Bhashkar Mazumder, Sayeh Nikpay, Jesse
Rothstein, Lucie Schmidt, Marianne Wanamaker, John Weymark, and Laura Wherry, and from seminar participants at the
University of Arizona, UC Berkeley, University of Chicago CHAS, Cornell, Dartmouth, UC Davis, UCLA, Ohio State
University, Princeton University, RAND, UT Knoxville, and Vanderbilt University, Wisconsin Institute for Research on
Poverty, and NBER DAE and HE Summer Institutes. Excellent research assistance was provided by Sergio Barrera, Morgan
Connolly, Jasmine Davidson, and Matt Pesner. All errors are my own.

Page 3 of 146

In 2015, the joint federal and state public health insurance programs, Medicaid
and the Children’s Health Insurance Program, covered 40 percent of children at a
cost of $90 billion. Costs have been central to recent arguments about the size of
these program. Six states have recently considered opting out of Medicaid entirely
(Adamy and King Jr. 2010), and some proposals would limit Medicaid’s federal
financing and allow states to restrict eligibility and services in ways that have not
been allowed since the 1950s (A.J. Goodman-Bacon and Nikpay 2017).
Short-run empirical evaluations show that Medicaid improves health, but for
some groups these effects may not justify the size of the program (Finkelstein,
Hendren, and Luttmer 2019). For example, while Medicaid saves lives (Currie and
Gruber 1996a, 1996b; A. Goodman-Bacon 2018c; Sommers, Baicker, and Epstein
2012), the health effects are small for middle-income groups, and costs per life
saved can be high. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment shows improvements
in self-reported health measures but not in clinical measures, providing support for
both Medicaid’s advocates (Kishore 2014) and critics (Antos and Capretta 2014;
Roy 2014).
Accounting for Medicaid’s effects over the course of its recipients’ lives,
however, may change this cost-benefit calculation. However, many Medicaid
expansions have focused on children during critical periods, which could lead to
large effects later in life (Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach 2010). Improvements
in adult health and economic outcomes can also lower net public costs by reducing
spending on programs linked to poor health, or by increasing tax revenue (Hendren
and Sprung-Keyser 2020).
New research revisits eligibility expansions from the 1980s and shows that
Medicaid can have positive long-run effects on health, human capital, earnings, and
tax payments (Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie 2014; Cohodes et al. 2014; Miller and
Wherry forthcoming; Thompson 2017; Wherry and Meyer 2015; Wherry et al.
2015). Yet these studies observe cohorts in their 20s, so longer-run effects,

Page 4 of 146

especially those tied to health conditions that emerge at older ages, may be
significantly larger or smaller than existing estimates. The 1980s expansions also
provided a combination of medical, food, and cash benefits, making it difficult to
infer which aspect of the reforms generate reduced-form treatment effects. Finally,
the sequential eligibility expansions preclude common tests of the validity of the
research design such as pre-trend comparisons, so we have little direct evidence on
this point.
This paper builds on A. Goodman-Bacon (2018c) to provide new evidence on
Medicaid’s longer-run effects on health and labor market outcomes. I exploit the
program’s introduction between 1966 and 1970 and the federal mandate that
Medicaid cover all cash welfare recipients (“categorical eligibility”). 1 These two
program features led to a sudden increase in public insurance eligibility that was
larger in areas with higher welfare participation. From a long-run perspective,
cohorts born closer to Medicaid spent more years potentially eligible for it, and
those from higher-welfare states accumulated more eligibility per year. Cumulative
childhood Medicaid eligibility thus phased in gradually across cohorts but more
quickly for those from higher-welfare states.
This setting offers crucial advantages for understanding Medicaid’s longer-run
effects. First, the cohorts of young children covered by Medicaid at its inception
were born in the mid-1950s through mid-1970s, so they are up to 30 years older
than the cohorts covered in the 1980s. Second, I provide a unified analysis of health
and socioeconomic outcomes: cumulative mortality rates from 1980-2016 (using
Vital Statistics data), self-reported disability, labor market status, transfer program
participation, educational attainment, and the distribution of earnings and transfer
income (from the 2000-2017 Census/American Community Survey). Third,
Sohn (2017) and Boudreaux, Golberstein, and McAlpine (2016) also estimate longer-run effects
of Medicaid’s introduction, but primarily rely on differences in when states implemented Medicaid.
A. Goodman-Bacon (2018c) discusses the validity of this timing variation.
1

Page 5 of 146

Medicaid’s introduction defines clear pre-treatment cohorts and facilitates direct
tests of the research design not typically implemented in research on the sequential
expansions of the 1980s and 1990s.
I estimate reduced-form effects of childhood eligibility using a difference-indifferences design that compares cohorts born at different times relative to
Medicaid implementation (first difference) in states with different categorical
eligibility rates in the year of implementation (second difference). Variation in
initial welfare rates came from long-standing institutional features of states, which
matches direct evidence that they were uncorrelated with levels or trends in
economic, demographic, health, and policy characteristics. Nevertheless, this
variation strongly predicts contemporaneous Medicaid participation and
cumulative Medicaid eligibility. Comparing adult outcomes across cohorts born in
different years relative to Medicaid implementation and in states with different
initial welfare rates is therefore unlikely to confound the program’s effects with
other health, socioeconomic, or policy changes.
Event-study specifications further support the validity of the design by showing
that adult outcomes track patterns of eligibility closely. They are uncorrelated with
initial Medicaid eligibility for respondents who are too old to have qualified as
children; diverge gradually in higher- versus lower-eligibility states for cohorts
with increasing exposure; and flatten out for post-Medicaid cohorts with the same
predicted childhood eligibility. Cohorts with early-life Medicaid eligibility are
healthier adults as measured by mortality and disability, and they work more and
receive less in transfer income. New earnings largely offset lower transfers for
white cohorts, leaving individual income unchanged. I find smaller reductions in
transfer income, but similar increases in employment for nonwhite cohorts.
Nonwhite high school graduation rates also increase, which leads to larger increases
in earnings and total income and lower poverty rates.

