Leaning against the wind and crisis risk
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0310.R2
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Date Submitted by the
17-Sep-2020
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Schularick, Moritz; University of Bonn, Economics; Federal Reserve Bank
New York, Finance
ter Steege, Lucas; University of Bonn, Economics
Ward, Felix; Erasmus University Rotterdam, Erasmus School of
Economics
Keywords: E44, G15, N10

Page 1 of 30

Leaning against the wind and crisis risk ?
Moritz Schularick †

Lucas ter Steege ‡

Felix Ward §

September 14, 2020

Abstract

Can central banks defuse rising stability risks in financial booms by leaning against
the wind with higher interest rates? This paper studies the state-dependent effects
of monetary policy on financial crisis risk. Based on the near-universe of advanced
economy financial cycles since the 19th century, we show that discretionary leaning
against the wind policies during credit and asset price booms are more likely to
trigger crises than prevent them.
Keywords: financial stability, monetary policy, local projections.
JEL Codes: E44, E50, G01, G15, N10

?

Schularick acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy EXC 2126/1–39083886. Ter Steege gratefully acknowledges financial support by the
DFG Research Training Group 2281, “The Macroeconomics of Inequality” and the ERC-CoG project
Liquid-House-Cycle funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Program under grant agreement No.
724204. Schularick is supported by the European Research Council (ERC-2017-COG 772332). The views
expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
†
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Department of Economics, University of Bonn; and CEPR
(schularick@uni-bonn.de).
‡
Department of Economics, University of Bonn; (s6luters@uni-bonn.de).
§
Erasmus School of Economics, Erasmus University Rotterdam; and Tinbergen Institute
(ward@ese.eur.nl).

Page 2 of 30

How should a central bank react when it observes that a potentially dangerous credit
and asset price boom is under way? Can policymakers defuse rising financial stability
risks by leaning against the wind and increasing interest rates?
Two prominent historical episodes delineate the issue that our paper speaks to. Consider the U.S. economy in 1928. Concerned about booming stock prices, a frenzy in
commercial real estate markets, and substantial lending against both, the Federal Reserve increased policy rates from 3.5% to 6% between January 1928 and August 1929,
surprising market participants. Most economic historians today think that these policy
decisions, instead of bringing financial markets and credit growth back to more sustainable
levels, played an important role in triggering the Great Depression (Eichengreen, 1992;
Bernanke, 2002). Could the economy have avoided the financial crash had policy makers
not raised interest rates to discourage what they perceived as rampant speculation in the
stock market? Fast-forward 75 years. In the 2000s, U.S. policymakers decided to not lean
against booming credit and housing markets. Instead, they stuck to a policy that was,
by and large, consistent with flexible inflation targeting without taking financial stability
considerations on board (Bernanke, 2010). Financial imbalances continued to grow and
erupted in the 2008 global financial crisis. What would have happened had the Federal
Reserve raised interest rates to lean against the credit boom? Could the crash and the
Great Recession have been avoided?
The two biggest financial crises in the past 100 years come with conflicting messages
regarding the effectiveness of leaning against the wind (LAW) policies in safeguarding
financial stability. Notwithstanding, current debates on the financial stability mandate
of central banks often invoke one or the other episode to argue for or against leaning
against the wind. Yet, which historical lesson is actually representative? The issue looms
large for current thinking about monetary policy (Stein, 2013; Svensson, 2017; Adrian and
Liang, 2018). It has become exceedingly clear how large the economic costs of financial
crises are (Cerra and Saxena, 2008; Jordà, Schularick and Taylor, 2013). Moreover, recent
research suggests that such financial boom states are detectable in real-time using quantity
and price indicators (Richter, Schularick and Wachtel, forthcoming) so that policymakers
have the chance to intervene. Yet, what do we know about the effects of monetary policy
changes on financial stability during financial booms? The answer so far is not much,
other than inconclusive anecdotal evidence.
This paper aims to close this gap. We systematically study the available evidence
for the state-dependent effects of monetary policy on financial stability. The state we
condition on is a financial boom, defined as a large and sustained deviation of credit
growth and real asset prices from trend. Conditional on being in such an (observable)
boom state, we estimate how a monetary policy shock affects financial crisis probability
and severity. We do so based on the near-universe of advanced economy financial cycles

1

Page 3 of 30

and crises since the 19th century.
Note that the question we are interested in is not how systematic LAW policy rules
(S-LAW) affect financial stability and the macroeconomy. Our focus is squarely on discretionary LAW policy actions (D-LAW) that take place in a financial boom state, and
our identification strategy speaks to those cases only. Our empirical analysis is based on
a local projection instrumental variable (LP-IV) strategy that has recently been introduced by Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2019). The IV exploits a type of monetary policy
variation that is not itself influenced by local economic conditions, namely, policy rate
changes in small open economies with fixed exchange rates that are induced by the base
economy.
For instance, in the early 1990s, Sweden witnessed a credit and house price boom.
When the German Bundesbank surprised markets in December 1991 and raised its Lombard rate to 9.75% in response to inflationary pressures following German reunification,
under the prevailing fixed exchange rate regime, it forced the hand of the Swedish central
bank too. At the time, the New York Times (1991) quoted a market economist: “This
is the Bundesbank’s way of showing they will use their power and independence without
regard to the economic conditions in the rest of Europe.” The Riksbank had to defend
the exchange rate of the Swedish Krona vis-à-vis the German Mark. Following the Bundesbank, the Riksbank also increased its policy rate at a time when credit and housing
markets in Sweden were booming. This episode provides us with a quasi-experiment for
an exogenous change in monetary conditions at a time when credit and housing markets
in Sweden were in a financial boom.1
We bring this identification strategy to bear on a long-run dataset that spans 150 years
and covers most advanced economies, including dates of systemic financial crises. The
dataset contains 1,525 country-year observations of countries whose currency is pegged to
a base country’s currency. Among those, we observe more than 170 credit boom episodes,
of which 98 coincide with exogenous increases in base country policy rates. This rich
dataset and the IV identification strategy allow us, for the first time, to zoom in on the
causal effects of D-LAW policy—increases in policy rates during booms in credit and asset
prices.
Our results are unambiguous in the sense that the estimates suggest that the effect of
D-LAW policy on crisis risk has the opposite sign from what is often assumed. We show
that a 1 percentage point (ppt) policy rate change during a financial boom increases the
risk of a financial crisis by about 10 ppts over a one-year horizon. Crisis risk remains
elevated for about two years after the monetary shock before subsiding to its long-run
average level. However, at no point in the five years following the policy rate increase do
1
For this reason, the identification strategy does not speak directly to the two introductory examples
of monetary policy (in-)action during financial booms in the U.S. The U.S. was a base country, not a
pegged economy, in both instances.

2

Page 4 of 30

we find evidence for a reduction in crisis risk. The empirical evidence thus lends support
to some of the worst fears about D-LAW policy—that it is more likely to trigger crises
than prevent them (Bernanke and Gertler, 2000; Bernanke, 2002).
Although D-LAW heightens crisis risk in the near term, it could still be beneficial if
it limits the economic costs of the crisis. We compare real GDP losses across financial
crises that were preceded by different degrees of D-LAW prior to the start of the crisis,
instrumenting the central bank’s pre-crisis monetary policy stance. Our findings suggest
that D-LAW policy does not systematically reduce crisis severity. In the five years after a
financial crisis, real GDP falls by around 8% below trend, regardless of whether pre-crisis
monetary policy was taking a leaning stance.
We corroborate these findings through a series of robustness checks. In particular,
we examine alternative financial boom definitions, threats to the exclusion restriction,
alternative financial crisis definitions, and differences between D-LAW interventions that
take place early on versus late during financial booms. Throughout, the crisis trigger
effect of D-LAW policy emerges as a robust feature of the data, whereas evidence for the
crisis severity reduction effect remains elusive.
The empirical evidence brought together in this paper substantiates concerns that have
been voiced by the opponents of leaning policies (Bernanke and Gertler, 2001; Gilchrist
and Leahy, 2002; Svensson, 2017): contractionary monetary policy at best appears ineffective at addressing financial instability risks and at worst appears outright harmful
(Bernanke and Gertler, 2000; Bernanke, 2002). Most existing studies of D-LAW policy
focus on how monetary policy affects financial crisis risk and severity through its effect on
credit growth (Bauer and Granziera, 2017; Svensson, 2017). This “credit-only” approach
suggests that D-LAW policy decreases crisis risk and ameliorates crisis severity to the
extent that it reins in pre-crisis credit growth. However, it is plausible that monetary
policy affects financial stability also through other channels, e.g., through its effect on
debt servicing costs, asset prices, expectations, and incomes (Korinek and Simsek, 2016;
Alpanda and Zubairy, 2017). Our paper provides a direct causal estimate of the effects of
D-LAW on financial stability that is agnostic with respect to the channels at work. The
findings we obtain on the basis of this approach contradict the notion that D-LAW can
lower crisis risk, notwithstanding its effect on credit growth.2
Our findings represent a stronger indictment of D-LAW policy than is implied by the
canonical cost-benefit analysis of Svensson (2017). In Svensson’s work, the main cost
of D-LAW comes from the adverse impact of a discretionary monetary tightening on
unemployment, while its benefit comes from a lower crisis probability and a reduced crisis
severity. By contrast, the results in our paper indicate that D-LAW policy neither lowers
2
Note that the “credit-only” approach has also found its way into analyses of S-LAW policy, through
semi-structural models that make crisis probability a function of credit growth only (Gerdrup et al., 2017;
Gourio, Kashyap and Sim, 2018; Ajello et al., 2019).

3

Page 5 of 30

crisis probability, nor reduces crisis severity.
Theoretical studies have focused on monetary policy rules that incorporate S-LAW
elements (Woodford, 2012; Filardo and Rungcharoenkitkul, 2016; Gourio, Kashyap and
Sim, 2018). Such rules require the central bank to react to financial booms in a rule-based
way. Currently, most central banks do not follow an explicit S-LAW policy rule. Any
policy change in that direction would thus initially resemble a discretionary policy change
until the commitment to the new policy regime has been credibly established (Svensson,
2016).3 So while our paper speaks to the effects of state-dependent discretionary changes
in monetary policy and not to the effects of S-LAW, it can also inform the debates about
the design and transition to S-LAW policies.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section I introduces the data,
and section II describes our empirical strategy. The results are presented in section III.
Section IV concludes.

I.

Data

Our main data source is the JST Macrohistory Database (Jordà, Schularick and Taylor, 2017, http://www.macrohistory.net/data/). It provides annual data on the real
economy and the financial sector for 17 developed countries since 1870. The countries
included in the sample are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, and the United States.
To analyze how monetary policy affects financial crisis risk, we use the systemic financial crisis dummy defined by Schularick and Taylor (2012). This binary indicator is
a narrative crisis measure that takes the value 1 in years in which a country experienced
bank runs, bank defaults, forced mergers, or major public interventions in the financial
sector. As a robustness check, we also consider the banking crisis dummies defined by
Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and Baron, Verner and Xiong (2018) (see online Appendix
B). Regardless of the crisis indicator chosen, we obtain very similar results.
Our main explanatory variable of interest is the stance of monetary policy, which we
measure as the change in nominal short-term interest rates. The short-term risk-free
nominal rates most consistently available across our long-run sample are the yields on
3-month government securities and money market interest rates. Other variables that
enter our analysis also come from the JST Macrohistory Database.
3

The relative infrequency of financial booms raises further questions about the extent to which central
banks are able to credibly commit to a S-LAW policy rule, as well as the private sector’s ability to
systematically incorporate such a rule in its decision making.

4

