Competition and Entry in Agricultural Markets: Experimental
Evidence from Kenya
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2017-1397.R3
Manuscript Type: Administrator
Keywords: D43, O13, Q13

Page 1 of 90

Competition and Entry in Agricultural Markets:
Experimental Evidence from Kenya
Lauren Falcao Bergquist and Michael Dinerstein∗
June 6, 2020

Abstract
African agricultural markets are characterized by low farmer revenues and high consumer food prices. Many have worried that this wedge is partially driven by imperfect
competition among intermediaries. This paper provides experimental evidence from
Kenya on intermediary market structure. Randomized cost shocks and demand subsidies are used to identify a structural model of market competition. Estimates reveal
that traders act consistently with joint profit maximization and earn median markups
of 39%. Exogenously-induced firm entry has negligible effects on prices, and low takeup of subsidized entry offers implies large fixed costs. We estimate that traders capture
82% of total surplus.

JEL Classifications: D22, D43, F12, L13, L81, O13, Q13

∗

We thank Hoyt Bleakley, Marshall Burke, Ying Fan, Benjamin Faber, Willa Friedman, Benjamin Handel, Kaushik Krishnan, Nicolas Li, Jeremy Magruder, Jamie McCasland, Edward Miguel, Craig McIntosh,
Odyssia Ng, Katalin Springel, Christopher Sullivan, Michael Walker, Dean Yang and numerous seminar participants. We also thank Honglin Li, Meshack Odhiambo Okello, Ben Wekesa, Deborrah Muthoki Wambua,
and Innovations for Poverty Action for excellent research assistance. This research was supported by funding
from the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and the research initiative “Private Enterprise Development in
Low-Income Countries” (EG 1764 and MRG004_3854), a program funded jointly by the Centre for Economic
Policy Research (CEPR) and the Department for International Development (DFID). The views expressed
are not necessarily those of CEPR or DFID. The design for this experiment was registered with the AEA RCT
Registry AEARCTR-0000682 (see Bergquist (2015)). IRB approval provided by the University of California, Berkeley (CPHS Protocol Number 2014-08-6612) and the Maseno University Ethics Review Committee
(Proposal Reference Number MSU/DRPC/MUERC/000081/14). The data repository is openicpsr-119743
(see Bergquist and Dinerstein (2020)). All errors are our own. Authors can be reached at lfb@umich.edu
and mdinerstein@uchicago.edu.

1

Page 2 of 90

The 1980s and 1990s saw a wave of liberalization sweep across African agricultural markets as part of broad structural adjustment plans. Inherent in the promise of these reforms
was the presumption that a competitive private sector would emerge to take advantage of
newly created arbitrage opportunities, with agricultural traders efficiently moving crops from
surplus to deficit regions, and from harvest to lean seasons. However, recent empirical estimates suggest that agricultural markets remain poorly integrated, with prices varying widely
across regions and seasons (Moser et al., 2009; Burke et al., 2019). High transaction costs
contribute to this limited market integration. Transport costs in Africa are the highest in
the world (Teravaninthorn and Raballand, 2009); also prevalent are harder-to-measure costs
associated with search (Aker, 2010), contractual risk (Startz, 2017), and price uncertainty
(Dillon and Dambro, 2016).
However, much less is known about the form of competition among intermediary traders
in agricultural markets in developing countries. Whether, and how much, traders are exerting
market power matters for policymaking: if intermediaries are operating in a competitive
environment in which price gaps are purely due to high transactions costs, then policies
that reduce these transaction costs – road improvements, preferential terms for business
expansion loans, and trade intelligence systems for broadcasting prices to traders, for example
– would yield savings that traders will pass on to farmers (in the form of higher prices) and
consumers (in the form of lower prices). On the other hand, if traders are exercising a high
degree of market power, gains from policies that reduce traders’ operating costs may be
captured mostly by intermediaries. To meaningfully improve farmer and consumer welfare
in this environment, policies may need to explicitly target enhanced competition among
intermediaries.
In this paper, we present some of the first experimental evidence on the market structure
in which African agricultural traders operate. To this end, we implement three randomized
control trials that deliver new empirical evidence on the extent of cost pass-through, the
shape of demand, and the effects of entry on market prices. We interpret these estimates
in the context of a structural model and estimate the model of imperfect competition that
best fits the data and its welfare implications.
In the first experiment, we exogenously reduce traders’ marginal costs by offering to all
traders in a market a substantial, month-long subsidy per kg sold. We then observe how
much of this reduction in costs is passed through to the price offered to consumers. We find
that traders pass through only 22% of this reduction in costs to customers.
Nonetheless, the pass-through rate is insufficient to characterize imperfect competition

2

Page 3 of 90

as the curvature of demand could produce lower pass-through rates, holding behavior of
intermediaries constant. For example, the observed rate of pass-through could be consistent
with a Cournot competitive market structure with highly concave demand or with a perfectly collusive market structure with moderately concave demand. In order to distinguish
between the roles played by intermediary conduct and consumer demand curvature, we run
a second experiment to estimate the curvature of demand. In this experiment, we offer consumers random reductions in price spanning a range of counterfactual pass-through rates
and measure the resulting quantities purchased. This experimental variation in prices allows
us to identify consumer demand without having to rely on strong identification assumptions.
We specify and estimate a highly flexible demand function.
To determine agricultural intermediaries’ form of competition, we start with a simple
model of demand and supply that nests Cournot competition and joint profit maximization. This model transparently maps the experimentally estimated pass-through rate and
demand curvature into inference about the form of competition. We find that traders are
not competing – the estimated parameter governing how traders value other traders’ profits
is statistically indistinguishable from that representing a perfectly collusive model in which
traders form agreements (perhaps tacitly) about prices and act as a single profit-maximizing
monopolist in the market. We can rule out Cournot competition with 95% confidence.
We then relax key assumptions in the simple model and estimate a more general model
that allows for within-market trader heterogeneity and non-constant marginal costs, as well
as an extensive margin to demand. We rely on the same experimental variation to identify
the more general model, and introduce additional instruments describing how a trader’s
choices in one market depend on experimental variation in the other markets in which he
sells. These multi-market traders, and their exposure to experimental variation across all of
their markets, allow us to identify a non-constant marginal cost function. Our estimates from
the more general model again imply conduct consistent with joint profit maximization; as
with the simple model, we can reject Cournot competition. Traders capture high markups,
with the median trader earning a 39% markup. We also offer non-nested tests of joint profit
maximization and Cournot competition that again point toward joint profit maximization
as describing traders’ conduct.
Our third experiment generates exogenous entry by offering traders incentives to enter
randomly selected markets for the first time. These results serve two purposes. First, we
test whether policies that encourage market entry can decrease market power and promote
competition. Second, traders’ willingness to accept the entry subsidies – the size of which is

3

Page 4 of 90

randomized – reveals how they trade off fixed costs versus variable profits, which enables us
to estimate total trader profits and conduct a complete welfare analysis. We find that the
entry subsidies induce an additional 0.6 traders per market-day on average, a 16% increase
over the mean market size (and 21% over the median). These additional traders have only
small impacts on price. We find that competition in markets in which entrants have no prior
connections increases to a level that is statistically indistinguishable from Cournot competition, but that markets in which entrants have prior connections continue to be collusive.
Entrants with no prior connections, however, are less willing to take up the entry offer, indicating that the most likely compliers from a policy aimed at increasing entry may not be
effective in increasing competition.
We use this experimental variation to identify an entry model in which potential entrants
decide to enter a market when their variable profits upon entry – which depend on marginal
costs and the impact of entry on market competition – exceed their fixed costs, net of
the experimental entry subsidy. Our estimates indicate that potential entrants have high
fixed costs that are positively correlated with marginal costs. Extending the estimates to
incumbent traders, we find that the median trader’s fixed costs constitute 71% of variable
profits; the median (mean) trader keeps 12% (25%) of revenues as profit, but the largest
traders earn the highest markups such that in the aggregate traders capture 82% of total
surplus, while consumers capture just 18%.
We use our estimated demand, quantity-setting, and entry models to solve for counterfactual equilibria were traders to engage in Cournot competition. We estimate that switching
from joint profit maximization to Cournot competition would have large effects on surplus
division, as consumer surplus would triple and deadweight loss would fall by a third.
This paper is one of the first to experimentally test the competition model of rural
agricultural markets directly. Previous attempts to measure competition or market efficiency
have mainly relied on observational methods. Observational studies have typically found
high rates of pass-through across major markets (Rashid and Minot, 2010), though these
high transmission rates may not extend beyond major urban markets (Moser et al., 2009).
Moreover, interpretation of this observational evidence is confounded by common shocks such
as shared harvest times and reverse flows across seasons. One exception to this primarily
observational literature is a recent paper by Casaburi and Reed (2016), which studies the
effect of an experimental subsidy per unit purchased by cocoa traders in Sierra Leone. They
find small pass-through in terms of price, but larger pass-through in credit, suggesting the
importance of interlinked relationships in their context (a feature not relevant in the Kenyan

4

Page 5 of 90

maize markets we study, in which over 95% of transactions are conducted in cash).1
Another set of papers attempts to directly measure traders’ profits in order to draw
inference about the size of rents and model of competition. These have generally found that
average trader profits are moderately large, though subject to significant variability, leaving
a question mark on whether these returns represent rents or risk premia (Dillon and Dambro,
2016). Moreover, these direct measures are subject to potentially severe measurement error
in the face of difficult-to-quantify search, own labor, and fixed costs, as well as a general
lack of record keeping (Fafchamps et al., 2005).2 The sensitivity of directly asking about
profits in an environment in which traders are often labeled as exploitative presents a further
challenge.
Finally, a set of papers has applied experimental methods to the somewhat related question of the impact of offering price information to farmers on their ability to extract better
prices from traders. While most studies find null results (Fafchamps and Minten, 2012; Mitra
et al., 2015),3 it is unclear if this suggests traders are already offering competitive prices given
their costs or whether farmers are simply unable to use this information to improve their
bargaining position. There is therefore a paucity of causal evidence on how traders compete
(Dillon and Dambro, 2016) despite a growing interest in the role these intermediaries play in
determining the allocation of gains from trade (Antras and Costinot, 2011; Bardhan et al.,
2013).4
More broadly, this paper follows a long literature on testing among different models of
competition. We follow Nevo (2001) and Miller and Weinberg (2017), among many others,
in testing among common models of competition nested in a single framework. We also
implement non-nested tests of joint profit maximization and Cournot competition in the
spirit of Berry and Haile (2014) and similar to Backus et al. (2019a), which avoids some
of the issues with the nested approach. To identify the form of competition, we rely on an
1
Because their subsidy is offered only to a subset of traders in the market, Casaburi and Reed (2016)
must ultimately rely on observational estimates of pass-through to measure the form of competition, as their
experimental estimates appear to be affected by within-market spillovers. Further, in the absence of evidence
on the shape of farmer supply, they are forced to make strong linearity assumptions. Because the curvature
of the market facing traders (farmer supply in their case, consumer demand in ours) is crucial to interpreting
the pass-through rate, we experimentally estimate this curvature.
2
Only 58% of traders in our sample keep any written records and, among this group, most records are
fairly rudimentary.
3
The exception is Hildebrandt et al. (2015), which finds that farmers who receive price information earn
5% higher prices for their yams, but this effect disappears by the second year of the study.
4
In a quasi-experimental variant of this literature, Casaburi et al. (2013) find that expansion of the road
network in Sierra Leone led to price decreases that can be best explained under a search cost framework,
and which are inconsistent with either Bertrand competition or Cournot oligopsony.

5

