Risk Exposure and Acquisition of Macroeconomic
Information
Journal: American Economic Review: Insights
Manuscript ID AERI-2020-0662.R2
Manuscript Type: Regular Submission - High Income Country - Member
Date Submitted by the
22-Feb-2021
Author:
Complete List of Authors: Roth, Christopher; Institute on Behavior and Inequality,
Settele, Sonja; University of Copenhagen, Department of Economics and
CEBI
Wohlfart, Johannes; University of Copenhagen, Economics
Keywords: D12, D14, E32

Page 1 of 58

Disclosure Statement for American Economic Review: Insights
Title: “Risk Exposure and Acquisition
of Macroeconomic Information”
Author: Christopher Roth
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper. Funding for the experiments was obtained from the Fritz-Thyssen
Foundation. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Frankfurt and the
University of Warwick.

Christopher Roth
February 22, 2021

Page 2 of 58

Disclosure Statement for American Economic Review: Insights
Title: “Risk Exposure and Acquisition
of Macroeconomic Information”
Author: Johannes Wohlfart
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper. Funding for the experiments was obtained from the Fritz-Thyssen
Foundation. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Frankfurt and the
University of Warwick.

Johannes Wohlfart
February 22, 2021

Page 3 of 58

Disclosure Statement for American Economic Review: Insights
Title: “Risk Exposure and Acquisition
of Macroeconomic Information”
Author: Sonja Settele
I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in the paper. Funding for the experiments was obtained from the Fritz-Thyssen
Foundation. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Frankfurt and the
University of Warwick.

Sonja Settele
February 22, 2021

Page 4 of 58

Risk Exposure and Acquisition of Macroeconomic
Information
By C HRISTOPHER R OTH AND S ONJA S ETTELE AND J OHANNES W OHLFART∗
We conduct an experiment with a representative sample from the US
to study households’ demand for macroeconomic information. Respondents who learn of a higher personal exposure to unemployment risk
during recessions increase their demand for an expert forecast about the
likelihood of a recession. This finding is consistent with macroeconomic
models of endogenous information acquisition, according to which the
demand for information depends on its expected benefits. Moreover, respondents’ updating about their personal unemployment risk suggests
that households are imperfectly informed about their exposure to aggregate fluctuations, which may distort their beliefs about the benefits of
acquiring macroeconomic information.
JEL: D12, D14, D83, D84, E32, G11
Keywords: Risk Exposure, Macroeconomic Conditions, Information Acquisition, Experiment.
Information frictions feature a central role in many theories of expectation formation. In some models, these frictions are assumed to be exogenous (Carroll,
2003; Klenow and Willis, 2007; Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Mankiw et al., 2003;
Wiederholt, 2015; Woodford, 2003). By contrast, in models of endogenous information acquisition, economic agents with a limited capacity to acquire or
process information choose how much information to acquire depending on its
expected benefits. For instance, this prediction is at the core of theories of rational inattention (Maćkowiak and Wiederholt, 2009; Maćkowiak et al., 2018; Sims,
2003), sparsity (Gabaix, 2019) or sticky information with endogenous updating
frequency (Reis, 2006).
In this paper, we test this prediction in the context of exposure to unemployment risk during recessions, and how it affects individuals’ demand for a forecast about the likelihood of a recession. Perceived unemployment risk plays an
important role in models of spending and saving decisions, investment choices
∗ Roth:
University of Warwick, Social Sciences Building, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK, Christopher.Roth@warwick.ac.uk. Settele: Department of Economics and CEBI, University of Copenhagen, Øster
Farimagsgade 5, Building 35 1353 Copenhagen K, sonja.settele@econ.ku.dk. Wohlfart: Department of Economics and CEBI, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 35 1353 Copenhagen K, johannes.wohlfart@econ.ku.dk. We thank the editor, Pete Klenow, and three anonymous referees for thoughtful
comments that improved the paper considerably. We are grateful to Ingar Haaland, Lukas Hensel, Johannes
Stroebel, Michael Weber, Mirko Wiederholt, and seminar and conference participants at Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Bergen and the ifo Conference on Macroeconomics and Survey Data (Munich) for useful comments.
Timo Haller and Hrishikesh Iyengar provided excellent research assistance. We received ethics approval from
Goethe University Frankfurt and the University of Warwick. We are grateful for funding from the FritzThyssen Foundation. The activities of CEBI are financed by the Danish National Research Foundation, Grant
DNRF134. Our study is registered on the AEA RCT registry (6580) (Roth et al., n.d.).

1

Page 5 of 58

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

and labor market behavior. Higher exposure to unemployment risk during recessions should increase the expected benefits of acquiring information about
the likelihood of a recession, as – depending on individuals’ exposure – such information should allow them to predict their personal unemployment risk more
accurately and make better economic decisions.
Testing how information acquisition depends on exposure to macroeconomic
risk is challenging with observational data. Offering pieces of information to
more and less exposed individuals and comparing their demand for this information is problematic as those who are more exposed to macroeconomic risk
should already be better informed about pieces of news that are relevant for
their macroeconomic outlook to begin with, which may crowd out their demand
for additional information. Moreover, more exposed individuals differ from less
exposed individuals in many unobservables, such as the cost of acquiring and
processing information. To circumvent these identification challenges, we propose an experiment that exogenously varies people’s beliefs about their own
exposure to macroeconomic risk. This allows us to compare otherwise similar
individuals who hold differential beliefs about the relevance of a piece of information to themselves.
We conduct our experiment with an online sample representative of the US
population in full-time employment in terms of age, income, region, education
and gender. The experiment proceeds as follows: First, we measure respondents’
beliefs about the effect of the Great Recession in 2008-9 on the unemployment
rate among people with similar characteristics as themselves. We then generate
exogenous variation in perceptions of exposure to macroeconomic risk by providing the respondents with data on actual changes in the unemployment rate
among people similar to them over the Great Recession. Respondents are randomly assigned to receive information based on data from either the American
Community Survey (ACS) or the Current Population Survey (CPS). We exploit
differences across the two Census surveys due to sampling variation and procedural differences as a source of exogenous variation in the provided information.
Thereafter, we elicit the respondents’ perceptions of how exposed they personally are to unemployment risk during recessions. Finally, respondents have to
choose between receiving an expert forecast about the likelihood of a recession,
a forecast about inflation, a forecast about the return on government bonds, a
forecast about government spending, or no forecast.
The main findings of our paper can be summarized as follows: First, information about changes of the unemployment rate among similar individuals during the last recession strongly affects respondents’ perceived risk of becoming
personally unemployed during the next recession, indicating that individuals
are imperfectly informed about their own risk exposure. Consistent with this,
a substantial fraction of respondents report that they are uncertain about their
group’s exposure to macroeconomic risk. This suggests that there exist frictions
in households’ knowledge of how relevant macroeconomic information is for

