Political Turnover, Bureaucratic Turnover, and the Quality of
Public Services
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2017-1867.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: H41, H83, J45

Page 1 of 144

November 26, 2017
Disclosure Statement for Mitra Akhtari
The author declares that she has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
All the data used in this paper is publicly available and, therefore, there was no need of IRB
approval. The author is aware of AER Data Availability Policy and commits to share all the data
and do-files if the paper is accepted for publication.

Page 2 of 144

November 26, 2017
Disclosure Statement for Diana Moreira
The author declares that she has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
All the data used in this paper is publicly available and, therefore, there was no need of IRB
approval. The author is aware of AER Data Availability Policy and commits to share all the data
and do-files if the paper is accepted for publication.

Page 3 of 144

November 26, 2017
Disclosure Statement for Laura Trucco
The author declares that she has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper.
All the data used in this paper is publicly available and, therefore, there was no need of IRB
approval. The author is aware of AER Data Availability Policy and commits to share all the data
and do-files if the paper is accepted for publication.

Page 4 of 144

Political Turnover, Bureaucratic Turnover and the Quality
of Public Services
By Mitra Akhtari, Diana Moreira & Laura Trucco*
We study how political turnover in mayoral elections in Brazil
affects public service provision by local governments. Exploiting a
regression discontinuity design for close elections, we find that municipalities with a new party in office experience upheavals in the
municipal bureaucracy: new personnel are appointed across multiple service sectors, and at both managerial and non-managerial
levels. In education, the increase in the replacement rate of personnel in schools controlled by the municipal government is accompanied by test scores that are .05-.08 standard deviations lower. In
contrast, turnover of the mayor’s party does not impact local (nonmunicipal) schools. These findings suggest that political turnover
can adversely affect the quality of public services when the bureaucracy is not shielded from the political process.
Countries differ in the extent to which politicians control the appointment and
turnover of public employees within the bureaucracy. One of the first crosscountry datasets on bureaucratic structure (Rauch and Evans, 2000) documents
that in many East Asian countries, as well as in India and Argentina, only the
top chiefs and vice-chiefs in the core administrative agencies of the country are
appointed by the president (or its equivalent). On the other end of the spectrum,
in Israel, Haiti, Nigeria, and Brazil, almost all of the top 500 positions in the
core government agencies are politically appointed by the president. A potential
consequence of having civil service positions at the discretion of politicians is
that bureaucratic turnover and political turnover become linked, leading to the
politically motivated replacement of bureaucrats. In this paper, we investigate the
scope and consequences of politically motivated replacement in local governments.
Accounts of such replacements in newly formed administrations are ubiquitous. In the U.S., senior staff turnover during President Trump’s first year was
* Akhtari:
Airbnb Data Science, 888 Brannan St, San Francisco, CA 94103, mitra.akhtari@airbnb.com. Moreira: University of California, Davis, Department of Economics, dsmoreira@ucdavis.edu https://dianamoreira.com/. Trucco: Amazon, 535 Terry Avenue N, Seattle, WA
98109, trucco@post.harvard.edu. Note that the work was done prior to joining Amazon. We would
like to thank Alberto Alesina, Alberto Abadie, Marianne Bitler, Julia Cagé, Nicolas Caramp, Michael
Carter, Raj Chetty, Claudia Costin, Ernesto Dal Bo, William Easterly, Raissa Fabregas, Claudio Ferraz,
Frederico Finan, Roland Fryer, Alejandro Ganimian, Peter Ganong, Edward Glaeser, Siddarth George,
Rema Hanna, Nathan Hendren, Lakshmi Iyer, Simon Jäger, Lawrence Katz, Asim Khwaja, Michael
Kremer, Horacio Larreguy, Sendhil Mullainathan, Nathan Nunn, Rohini Pande, Gautam Rao, Natalia
Rigol, Alexandra Roulet, Heather Sarsons, Andrei Shleifer, Monica Singhal, Jann Spiess, Edoardo Teso,
Crystal Yang for numerous helpful comments. Luiza Aires, Felipe Lima and Fernando Secco provided
excellent research assistance.

1

Page 5 of 144

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

a record-high 34%.1 Political discretion over personnel appointments can also
extend beyond the highest positions in the administration. In some Latin American countries, up to 26% of all government personnel worked under the threat
of removal by the sitting president, who often exercises the discretionary power
to remove personnel (Grindle, 2012). In the early 2000s in the national governments of Mexico and the Dominican Republic, 30,000 and 3,000 positions
changed hands, respectively, when new administrations were elected.2 High levels of bureaucratic replacement often lead to a public outcry over the adverse
consequences it may have for government services.3 For example, these replacements may render services unstable, as policies are discontinued (Bostashvili and
Ujhelyi, 2019). They may also lead to losses in personnel with position-specific
knowledge (Wilson, 1989). However, an overhaul of the bureaucracy may ensure
that the bureaucracy is serving the people rather than serving the interests of a
few powerful groups, such as themselves and other organized groups (Olson, 1982;
Grindle, 2004). In fact, Latin America’s ability to pursue many policy reforms
has been attributed to the widespread influence of politicians over bureaucratic
appointments.4
Given that politically motivated replacements frequently occur when a new
government comes to power, we ask: how does political turnover affect the bureaucracy and its performance? In Brazil, we find that political party turnover
at the mayoral position level widely reshapes the local government’s bureaucracy.
Political turnover and the associated disruption in the bureaucracy harm the quality of public education, one of the primary responsibilities of local government in
this context.
We focus on this particular context for several reasons. First, local politicians
control, directly and indirectly, the appointment of personnel to the municipal
bureaucracy. In particular, in Brazil, as in many Latin American countries, local
politicians have considerable discretion over the public education system and the
appointment of public school personnel, such as headmasters and teachers (Ferraz, Finan and Moreira (2012); Miranda and Pazello (2015); Munõz and Prem
1 President Trump’s first-year staff turnover was more than triple the turnover during the Obama
administration and higher than that of the five most recent U.S. presidents. See Brookings’ report: Why
is Trump’s staff turnover higher than the five most recent presidents accessed May 18, 2020.
2 These are raw counts of replacements that happened in the event of a political turnover (Iacoviello,
2006). These replacements could have happened in the absence of any political turnover. In contrast,
our paper estimates personnel replacement that can be solely attributed to a change in the ruling party.
3 According to The New York Times article: ”Trump appears to be launching the biggest assault
on the nation’s civil service system since the 1883 Pendleton Act”:(”Trump’s effort to remove the disloyal heightens unease across his administration”, The New York Times accessed May 22, 2020); The
Economist describes personnel reassignments during Trump’s administration that led to a complete
mismatch between an individual’s skills and responsibilities. It argues that such practices have raised
concerns among Republicans and Democrats about whether the federal government can perform vital
tasks . (”Bureaucratic Blight” The Economist accessed May 18, 2020)
4 According to Grindle (2012), in the early 2000s in Colombia and Panama, 38% of career personnel
and 26% of all government workers, respectively, worked under provisional appointments that could be
terminated at the discretion of the sitting president. The author argues that political appointees played
a role in the liberal reforms of the 1980s and 1990s and in the innovative cash transfer programs that
were rapidly put in place in the 1990s and 2000s in Latin America.

