Adviser compensation, endogenous entry and the advice
gap
Journal: American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
Manuscript ID AEJMicro-2020-0074.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: L11, L15, L51

Page 1 of 60
Title: Disclosure statement
Author: Jurre Thiel
Date: 19 October 2020

Version: 1

Page 1 af 1

Disclosure statement
Paper title: Adviser compensation, endogenous entry and the advice gap
Author: Jurre H. Thiel
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper

Page 2 of 60

Adviser compensation, endogenous entry and the advice
gap
By Jurre H. Thiel∗
To prevent biased advice, regulators increasingly ban commission
payments to financial advisers. Such bans are associated with “advice gaps”, meaning that advice becomes less accessible. To understand the trade-off between the quality and accessibility of advice,
this paper develops a model of price competition in advice markets
with endogenous entry of advisers. While commission bans increase consumer surplus in the short run, they hurt the profitability
of advisers. In the long run, advisers exit the market, advice becomes inaccessible and consumer surplus decreases. These results
imply that accounting for the endogeneity of market structure is
important when regulating advice.
JEL: L11, L15, L51, M52
Keywords: Advice, market structure, compensation
It is common for consumers to consult advisers before purchasing financial products. For example, in 2013, 37.5% of consumers in the United States reported
using the services of a financial planner or broker.1 Historically, financial advisers
are remunerated through commissions or kickbacks. In the wake of the financial crisis, regulators around the world became concerned that commissions could
cause advisers to give biased advice. Advice is biased when advisers recommend
a product with high kickbacks rather than the best product for the consumer.
Because of this concern, regulation of adviser remuneration has become increasingly common. For example, the requirement that commission payments have to
be disclosed is now almost universal.2
In recent years, some countries, most prominently the United Kingdom, Australia and The Netherlands, have banned commission payments to financial advisers altogether. When commissions are banned, advisers charge consumers a
fixed fee for advice. The first experience with commission bans suggests that
∗ Thiel:
Copenhagen Business School, Porcelænshaven 16A, 2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark,
juth.eco@cbs.dk. This paper replaces “The Remuneration of advisors in Markets for Complex Products”, which contained many similar insights. I thank Alexei Alexandrov, Björn Brügemann, Pieter
Gautier, Bruno Jullien, Karl Schlag, Randolph Sloof, Erik Verhoef, Julian Wright, Yaron Yehezkel and
especially my adviser José-Luis Moraga-González for their useful comments and suggestions. This paper has also benefited from presentations at the 2016 Search and Matching Conference in Amsterdam,
EARIE 2016 in Lisbon, IIOC 2017 in Boston, the 2017 CEPR-JIE School on Applied IO in Jerusalem,
the 2017 Consumer Search and Switching Workshop in Vienna and the 2019 TI Jamboree in Amsterdam.
1 Survey of Consumer Finances, 2013. Accessed from https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/scfindex.htm
on December 5, 2016.
2 For example, EU guideline 2014/65/EU requires disclosure of kickbacks in the context of investment
products and sets a framework for further regulation by member states. EU guideline 2016/97 regulates
kickbacks for insurance advisors. (EUR-Lex, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/)

1

Page 3 of 60

2

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

they are associated with so-called “advice gaps”. An advice gap occurs when
some consumers do not have access to financial advice. For example, the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK states that while “the move to fee-based advice
on retail investment products has improved transparency and ended conflicts of
interest caused by a mainly commission-driven model”, “advice is expensive and
is not always cost-effective for consumers” (Financial Conduct Authority, 2016,
p. 5). Indeed, many consumers report finding fee-based advice too costly.3 Thus,
there is a trade-off between the quality and the accessibility of advice.
At the same time, advisers claim that fee-based advice puts significant pressure
on their margins and harms the sustainability of their business. Taking again
the example of the UK, the number of advisers decreased by approximately 25%
around the ban on commissions (Financial Conduct Authority, 2016, p. 18). Such
a decline may directly contribute to the advice gap. In other markets, advisers
also report fierce competition after a shift to a fee-based model.4 Therefore, a
shift to fee-based advice causes a tension between consumers, who think advice
fees are too high, and advisers, who report downward pressure on fees and exit
the market.
This paper develops a theoretical framework to explain these developments
and study the trade-off between the quality and accessibility of advice. I study a
game in the vein of Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a), in which advisers recommend
one of two horizontally differentiated products. Advisers are remunerated either
through kickbacks or directly by consumers. I extend this model in two ways.
First, advisers are capacity constrained: because it takes a fixed amount of time
to give a consumer a recommendation, every adviser is limited in the number of
consumers it can serve. Second, to explain the observed exit of advisers after
commission bans, entry and exit of advisers are endogenous. These assumptions
mirror the statement by the Financial Conduct Authority that there not being
“enough advisers to go around” is a reason for the advice gap in the UK (Financial
Conduct Authority, 2016, p. 34).
My main results are as follows. For a fixed number of advisers (sufficiently large
to serve all consumers), remuneration through kickbacks is typically more efficient
than direct remuneration. The reason, as in Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a), is that
kickbacks steer consumers towards the more efficient firm. However, consumer
surplus is higher under direct remuneration than under kickbacks. This is because
under direct remuneration, advisers always recommend the product giving con3 For example, 51% percent of UK households who did not use financial advice but are identified by
the FCA as possibly having a need for it, report being unwilling to “pay for regulated financial advice at
any price.”. A further 20% of this group is unwilling to pay more than 100 pounds (Financial Conduct
Authority, 2017).
4 Another empirical example of fierce price competition after the shift to a fee-based instead of a
commission-based revenue model is the US asset management industry. As noted in a Fidelity Investment report, this shift “[increased] the level of competition in the independent adviser market
segment.” The report notes that fees have already decreased following a shift to fee-based management and expects further decreases in the future. From the 2016 Fidelity RIA Benchmarking Study.
https://clearingcustody.fidelity.com/app/proxy/content?literatureURL=/9879252.PDF. Accessed
October 7, 2018.

Page 4 of 60

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

ADVISER COMPENSATION AND ENDOGENOUS ENTRY

3

sumers the highest utility. This finding can explain why regulators, who arguably
care more about consumer surplus than efficiency, have banned kickbacks.
When accounting for entry and exit of advisers, this short-run result reverses.
Because advice is a homogeneous good, advisers compete their fee towards zero as
long as some advisers have spare capacity. On the other hand, when the market is
not covered, capacity constraints relax price competition between advisers. When
advisers are remunerated through kickbacks, advice is free for consumers. There
is therefore no price competition between advisers and capacity constraints play
a more limited role. Hence, adviser profits, as a function of the number of firms,
rotate when banning kickbacks: they are higher under direct remuneration than
under kickbacks if and only if the market is not covered. I show that, as a result,
the market is never covered under fee-based advice, while it is always covered
under commission-based advice. Since capacity constraints allow advisers to set
fees that extract almost all consumer surplus, consumer surplus is higher under
kickbacks than under direct remuneration in the free entry equilibrium.
These findings can generate the empirical observations that consumers find
fee-based advice costly but that at the same time advisers report significant competitive pressure and exit the market. When switching from commission-based to
fee-based advice, the existing capacity is unsustainable. Fees are driven towards
zero and advisers exit the market. In the long run, however, sufficiently many advisers exit the market that the remaining advisers regain significant market power
and advice becomes inaccessible. Therefore, while banning kickbacks benefits consumers in the short run, it harms them in the long run. While I derive this result
under an assumption of capacity constraints, I argue that other assumptions can
lead to similar rotations of adviser profits and hence give similar results. In the
extensions, I show that these results are also robust to making advisers’ capacity constraint endogenous, as well as to giving consumers an exogenous outside
option.
Related literature. — This paper contributes to the theoretical literature on

advice. My main contribution is to build a model of adviser pricing when kickbacks are banned, taking as endogenous the entry decisions of advisers. The
previous literature has taken the availability of advice as given. The first experiences with commission bans, as discussed above, however suggest that the
endogenous entry and exit of advisers is of first-order importance to understand
the effect of commission bans. This paper aims to fill this gap in the literature.
I build on arguably the most important contribution of this literature, Inderst
and Ottaviani (2012a). In their model, there is only a single adviser that is always accessible. Therefore, their model cannot capture the observed exit patterns
around the move from commission-based to fee-based revenue models. I embed
their model into a model of adviser entry and pricing to study this important policy issue. Another difference is that Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a) do not consider
the effects of moving to a fee-based remuneration model, even for a fixed number

Page 5 of 60

4

AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL

MONTH YEAR

of advisers. Armstrong and Zhou (2011), Stoughton, Wu and Zechner (2011) and
Inderst and Ottaviani (2012b) also provide various models of interaction between
advisers, consumers and upstream firms. They all similarly take the number of
advisers as fixed.
One paper that studies the effect of regulations on the market for financial advice, taking into account possible endogenous exit of advisers, is Bhattacharya,
Illanes and Padi (2020). However, they do not study a ban on commissions but
the effect of introducing a fiduciary duty. They find empirically that while the
introduction of a fiduciary duty causes the exit of advisers, it increases investor
welfare. They also provide a theoretical model to explain this result. The main
difference with this paper is conceptual: the introduction of a fiduciary duty
increases the costs of giving unsuitable advice, but otherwise leaves price formation (a commission-based model in their case) intact. The main message of this
paper on the other hand is that under fee-based remuneration price formation
is fundamentally different than under commission-based remuneration, and that
the increased competitive pressure faced by advisers is what paradoxically makes
consumers worse off. Indeed, it is not difficult to obtain results similar to Bhattacharya, Illanes and Padi (2020) by increasing the cost of giving bad advice in
my model. While both papers thus point to the importance of considering the
endogeneity of market structure when regulating advice, the differences in results
that we obtain also imply that different regulations may have very different effects
on consumer welfare.
There is also some recent empirical work on biased advice. Egan (Forthcoming)
studies the impact of commissions on brokers’ recommendations in the market for
convertible bonds. He empirically confirms the assumption made in theoretical
models of advice—including mine—that commissions lead to biased advice. To
better understand the role brokers play, he moreover calculates a counterfactual
in which brokers are forced to recommend consumers their best option. He finds
that consumer surplus increases. My results imply that such a counterfactual
does not automatically imply that banning commissions is also a good policy:
one has to take into account the entry and exit of advisers if advice is regulated
to get a realistic understanding of the regulation’s effect. Robles-Garcia (2020)
and Myśliwski and Rostom (2020) also find that commissions bias advice, in this
case in the context of the UK mortgage market, but similarly take the presence
of advice as given. Another empirical study on advice is Guiso et al. (2020), who
study banks’ steering in the Italian mortgage market. Their setting is however
somewhat different than the one I consider: in their market, banks recommend
one of their own products, while I consider independent advisers who recommend
a product produced by upstream firms.
Other recent papers on advice relate to other aspects of the market. Bardey
et al. (Forthcoming) study the incentives advisers have to collect information,
while De Cornière and Taylor (2019) consider the incentives of upstream firms
to invest in quality in the presence of an intermediary. Shen and Wright (Forth-

