From Weber to Kafka: Political Instability and the
Overproduction of Laws
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0672.R4
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: D72, D73

Page 1 of 94

From Weber to Kafka: Political Instability and
the Overproduction of Laws
Gabriele Gratton,
Claudio Michelacci

and

Luigi Guiso,
Massimo Morelli∗

March 26, 2021

Abstract
With inefficient bureaucratic institutions, the effects of laws are hard to assess and
incompetent politicians may pass laws to build a reputation as skillful reformers.
Since too many laws curtail bureaucratic efficiency, this mechanism can generate a
steady state with Kafkaesque bureaucracy. Temporary surges in political instability
heighten the incentives to overproduce laws and can shift the economy towards the
Kafkaesque state. Consistent with the theory, after a surge in political instability in
the early 1990s, Italy experienced a significant increase in the amount of poor-quality
legislation and a decrease in bureaucratic efficiency.

JEL Classification Numbers: D72, D73.
∗ Gratton:

UNSW Business School, UNSW Sydney, email: g.gratton@unsw.edu.au. Guiso: EIEF and
CEPR, email: luigi.guiso@eief.it. Michelacci: EIEF and CEPR, email: c.michelacci1968@gmail.com. Morelli:
Bocconi University, IGIER and CEPR, email: massimo.morelli@unibocconi.it. We would like to thank
for useful comments Stéphane Bonhomme, Massimo Bordignon, Francesco De Carolis, Ernesto Dal Bó,
Dana Foarta, Sean Gailmard, Paola Giuliano, Niko Jaakkola, Raquel Fernandez, Elena Manresa, Moritz
Osnabruegge, Bruno Pellegrino, Carlos Pimienta, Chris Pissarides, Robert Powell, Jesse Shapiro, David
Schmeidler, Giancarlo Spagnolo, Richard van Weelden, as well as seminar participants at the Australian
National University, Berkeley, Chicago Harris School, Harvard, London Business School, Stanford GSB, Tel
Aviv University, UCLA Anderson, UC Irvine, Università di Bergamo, Università di Tor Vergata, University of Melbourne, University of Michigan, University of Pittsburgh, University of Oregon, University of
Sydney, University of Zurich, University of Queensland, the 2019 ASSA Meetings, NBER Political Economy
Meeting, Glasgow Political Economy Workshop, Alghero Political Economy Workshop, Cyprus Conference
on Employment in Europe, and the Econometric Society North-American Summer Meetings. Research assistance by Tommaso Giommoni, Claudia Marangon, Santiago Perez Vincent, and Mohamed Badaoui is
gratefully acknowledged. Gabriele Gratton acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research
Council (ARC Discovery Project DP140102426); Claudio Michelacci from the European Research Council
(ERC Advanced Grant 293692); Massimo Morelli from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced
Grant 694583), IGIER and Dondena research center. The usual disclaimer applies.

Page 2 of 94

1 Introduction
Modern market economies rely upon the state bureaucracy to provide essential services
and to implement public policies. In practice, according to the World Bank Doing Business Dataset, there is substantial variation in how well bureaucracies perform across
countries. Some resemble the Weberian ideal of order and efficiency; others are known
for their Kafkaesque disorganization.1 The nature of a bureaucracy may also change over
time. In the 19th century, the Habsburg Monarchy was a model of Weberian efficiency
(Becker, Boeckh, Hainz and Woessmann, 2016). But by the beginning of the 20th century
the Habsburg bureaucracy had collapsed to a Kafkaesque state: payment of a single tax
in Vienna required the involvement of 27 public officials; the cost of collecting taxes in
Dalmatia exceeded the tax revenue (MacMillan, 2013).
In this paper we argue that permanent transitions from a Weberian to a Kafkaesque
bureaucracy may be rooted in the overproduction of low-quality legislation brought about
by (possibly brief) periods of political instability. The premise of our theory is that politics
and bureaucracy are complements in the supply of public policies: politicians pass laws
that determine what and how should be reformed; bureaucrats implement the laws. In
this context, bureaucratic efficiency is hindered when politicians pass too many and too
frequent laws, overloading the bureaucracy with too many acts to implement.
When a politician chooses whether to pass a new reform, she has a limited political
horizon—e.g., the next election or the expected time until the next significant change in
government coalition—and would like voters to believe that she is a competent, skillful
reformer. But the speed at which voters learn about the quality of a politician’s reform depends on the country’s bureaucratic efficiency. When the bureaucracy is efficient, reforms
are implemented swiftly and their effects are monitored transparently, so voters learn the
quality of each reform fast and accurately. In contrast, when the bureaucracy is inefficient, reforms are implemented slowly, if at all, and the effects of multiple reforms are
more likely to overlap, making it difficult to infer their individual quality. The political
horizon and bureaucratic efficiency jointly determine a politician’s incentive to propose
low-quality reforms. When the political horizon is shorter or bureaucracy is more inefficient, less competent politicians have greater incentives to pass their low-quality reforms.
In fact, passing reforms may signal competence with little risk that the voters will learn
1 Max Weber (1922) argued that a well-functioning bureaucracy guarantees order and maximizes effi-

ciency. Franz Kafka’s infamous description of the Habsburg administration at the beginning of the 20th
century, characterized by a disorienting complexity, is contained in Kafka’s unfinished novels Der Process
(The Trial), published in 1925 and Das Schloss (The Castle), published in 1926, as well as in other short
works published posthumously.

1

Page 3 of 94

that the reform is of low quality within the political horizon. Thus, a more stable political
environment and a more efficient bureaucracy reduce the production of low-quality laws,
while periods of political instability may lead to overproduction of laws.
To formalize this idea and to capture its dynamic implications, we study a dynamic
model of legislative production. We assume that, in each legislative term, the politicians
in office can pass reforms, but only competent politicians design reforms that are useful.
A politician’s competence is her private information, but it is publicly revealed if the bureaucracy implements the reform she passed. Bureaucracy is characterized by decreasing
returns: the larger the stock of past reforms that have yet to be implemented, the harder it
is for the bureaucracy to carry out and implement the reforms. Politicians maximize their
reputation for being competent at the end of the legislative term. Thus, in our model
the political horizon is captured by the length of the legislative term and bureaucratic
efficiency is determined by the inherited stock of outstanding reforms. In equilibrium, incompetent politicians face a trade-off: passing a useless reform that remains outstanding
by the end of the term signals competence, but if the reform is implemented within the
term, it reveals the incompetence of its proponent.
We set out the conditions for the existence of a Weberian steady state—with efficient
bureaucracy and few useless reforms—and a Kafkaesque steady state—with inefficient
bureaucracy and many useless reforms. We identify three channels through which political instability can cause a transition from a Weberian to a Kafkaesque state. A shock to
political instability may (i) directly shorten the political horizon (in the model, shorten the
legislative term), (ii) increase the pressure for reforms, and (iii) sometime cause the formation of short-lived technocratic governments. In our model, each of these three symptoms of political instability (either in isolation or in combination) can drive the economy
from a Weberian to a Kafkaesque steady state. In all three cases, the number of reforms
that the bureaucracy is called to handle suddenly increases. This dynamically reduces
bureaucratic efficiency, so that future incompetent politicians pass even more reforms,
further engulfing the bureaucracy and eventually pushing the economy towards a new,
Kafkaesque steady state.
We use our theory to study the sudden surge in political instability during the passage between the so-called First and Second Italian republics. During the First Republic
(1948-1992), the Italian political system was characterized by a stable balance of power
and policy agenda: the large Christian Democratic Party led every government coalition,
while the second largest party, the Italian Communist Party, was unable to compete or
enter coalitions simply because communist parties could not govern in a Western-bloc
country (a feature of the system known as the “K-factor”). The end of the Cold War rep2

Page 4 of 94

resents an exogenous shock to this equilibrium, starting a period—dubbed the Second
Republic—initially marked by frequent changes in governing coalitions, the appearance
and disappearance of new political parties, technocratic governments, and more frequent
elections, which have contributed to shortening the political horizon of Italian members
of parliament (MPs)—roughly by 50 percent according to some of our estimates.
Anecdotal evidence indicates that the history of the Second Republic is characterized
by frequent changes of the policy agenda and multiple broad-brush reforms of the welfare system, the public administration, and the territorial organization of the state. Using
text analysis we study all laws issued by the Italian parliament over the period 1948-2016
(more than 75,000 laws containing around 100 million words), taken from Normattiva
(2016). Upon the increase in political instability resulting from the end of the Cold War,
we find a sharp discontinuity in the production of legislation: the number of words of
law per quarter increases by a factor of two, while the average quality of legislation deteriorates according to several indicators of style based on law drafting manuals (Cassese,
1993; Butt and Castle, 2006), such as the length and phrasing of sentences and the intensity
of references to other laws. We also uncover indications that the efficiency of the Italian
bureaucracy has deteriorated over time, gradually becoming an increasingly salient issue in the Italian public debate—the number of times the word bureaucracy is mentioned
in the Italian press has increased by a factor of three. Both the structural break in legislative production and the trend in salience of bureaucracy are specific to Italy and not
observed in Germany. Therefore, they are unlikely to have been the direct effect of either
the Maastricht Treaty or the end of the Cold War. Using a structural VAR model, we also
find suggestive evidence that shocks to the amount of legislation cause a reduction in its
quality and make the bureaucratic problem more salient.
We also provide evidence that Italian politicians react to the type of incentives we describe in our model. In particular, we use micro data for Italian MPs during the Second
Republic. We first use an event study methodology to show that the visibility of a politician in the press increases when their bills are discussed in parliament, supporting the
claim that legislative activism has signaling value for politicians. We then directly test
the prediction that a shortening of the political horizon affects individual MPs’ legislative
incentives. In particular, we exploit variation in MPs’ competence and in one observable measure of the political horizon of individual MPs: the initial expected duration of
the legislative term. The expected duration of a legislative term depends on the size of
the parliamentary majority supporting the government, which has a random component
realized at the time of the election. As a result, some legislatures are more stable than others: of the seven legislatures covered by our sample, three ended within two years, while
3

Page 5 of 94

four reached the natural term of five years.2 Following Besley, Folke, Persson and Rickne
(2017) and Dal Bó, Finan, Folke, Persson and Rickne (2017), we measure MPs’ competence by their labor market earnings, which over the sample period is information not
easily available to the public. To efficiently identify MPs’ types and deal with a possible
classification bias, we also rely on the Grouped Fixed-effects estimator by Bonhomme and
Manresa (2015). In accordance with our theory, less competent politicians introduce bills
and pass laws that are more poorly drafted. We then perform a Difference-in-Differences
analysis and compare the relative performance in terms of both legislative activity and reelection outcomes of less and more competent politicians, in completed and uncompleted
legislatures. In our model, a shorter political horizon increases the relative incentives
of less competent politicians to pass useless laws and increases their relative reputation
among voters. In line with these predictions, we find that in shorter legislatures less competent politicians introduce 18% more bills per capita, pass 30% more laws, and have a
re-election probability 8 to 9 percentage points higher than average.
The premise of our theory is that politics and bureaucracy are complements in providing public capital, in contrast with the implicit substitutes view in Maskin and Tirole
(2004) and Alesina and Tabellini (2007, 2008), who study the trade-off between delegating choices to bureaucrats or elected politicians. There is a large literature studying the
internal functioning of the bureaucracy (e.g., Prendergast 2007, Gailmard and Patty, 2012,
Bertrand, Kramatz, Schoar and Thesmar, 2015, Nath, 2015); our focus instead is on legislative incentives as external determinants of bureaucratic performance. For the related
literature on the distortions caused by politicians’ career concerns see, e.g., Diermeier,
Keane and Merlo (2005), Mattozzi and Merlo (2008), Persson and Tabellini (2000), Rogoff
and Siebert (1988), Ash, Morelli and van Weelden (2017); for long term consequences see,
e.g., Bonfiglioli and Gancia (2013) and Bonfiglioli, Crinò, and Gancia (2020).
Starting with Romer and Rosenthal’s (1978) seminal work, a large literature has highlighted how institutional systems and political incentives can cause the overproduction of
public goods. In our model this is due to the combination of the politicians’ reputational
concerns and the delayed (and noisy) public learning about the quality of their actions.
Using the terminology in Prat (2005), voters have the “wrong kind” of information, which
induces politicians to take a “conformist” action—in this case, passing reforms.
Finally our paper is related to Aghion, Algan, Cahuc and Shleifer (2010) who show
how the lack of civicness and trust in institutions causes more legislation, which in turn
discourages the investment in civicness. This mechanism cam also generate a steady
2 In practice, because MPs’ pension entitlements only mature if the legislature lasts for at least two years,

all uncompleted legislatures end, unsurprisingly, after exactly two years.

4

