Different Strokes for Different Folks? Experimental Evidence
on the Effectiveness of Input and Output Incentive
Contracts for Health Care Providers with Varying Skills
Journal: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Manuscript ID AEJApp-2019-0220.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: D86, J41, O15

Page 1 of 89

DIFFERENT STROKES FOR DIFFERENT FOLKS? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF INPUT AND OUTPUT INCENTIVE CONTRACTS FOR
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS WITH VARYING SKILLS*
Manoj Mohanan, Katherine Donato, Grant Miller,
Yulya Truskinovsky, Marcos Vera-Hernández†
July 2020
Abstract
A central issue in designing incentive contracts is the decision to reward agents’ input use versus
outputs. The trade-off between risk and return to innovation in production can also lead agents
with varying skill levels to perform differentially under different contracts. We study this issue
experimentally, observing and verifying inputs and outputs in Indian maternity care. We find that
both contract types achieve comparable reductions in post-partum hemorrhage rates – but
payments for outputs were four times that of inputs. Providers with varying qualifications
performed equivalently under input incentives, while providers with advanced qualifications may
have performed better under output contracts.
JEL: D86, J41, O15
Keywords: Contracts, Incentives, Performance, Health,

* This research was made possible by funding and support from 3ie and DFID-India (OW2: 205 co-PIs: Mohanan

and Miller), World Bank HRITF (TF099435: PI Mohanan) and Government of Karnataka. We are grateful, for
comments and suggestions, to Alessandra Voena, Alessandro Tarozzi, Amar Hamoudi, Duncan Thomas, Erica
Field, Jerry La Forgia, Jishnu Das, Imran Rasul, Meredith Rosenthal, Michael Callen, Nava Ashraf, Neale
Mahoney, Neeraj Sood, Oriana Bandiera, Paul Gertler, Rohini Pande, Rob Garlick, Seema Jayachandran, Victoria
Baranov, Xiao Yu Wang, and anonymous reviewers as well as to audiences at AEA/ASSA 2017, ASHEcon 2016,
Barcelona GSE 2016, BREAD/CEPR 2016, Duke, Erasmus, FLAME, Harvard, iHEA Congress Milan, Tilburg, and
U. of S. California. Manveen Kohli provided excellent project management. We are thankful to Kultar Singh,
Swapnil Shekhar, and Anil Lobo from Sambodhi, as well as the field team for project implementation and data
collection. We gratefully acknowledge the support we received from World Bank (Paolo Belli, Patrick Mullen,
and Vikram Rajan) and the Government of Karnataka (Vandita Sharma, Selva Kumar, Suresh Mohammed,
Raghavendra Jannu, Atul Tiwari, Dr. Nagaraj, Dr. Sridhar, Dr. Prakash Kumar, Dr. Amruteshwari, and several
others). We are especially grateful to the many doctors and clinical experts who provided valuable guidance
and feedback, including Matthews Mathai, Dinesh Agarwal, Ayaba Worjolah, Vinod Paul, Sharad Iyengar, Kirti
Iyengar, Amarjit Singh, Suneeta Mittal, Lalit Baveja, and Sunesh Kumar. This study was approved by Duke
University Office of Human Subjects Research (Pro00031046) and registered in the American Economic
Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number AEARCTR-0000179.

† Mohanan: Sanford School of Public Policy, Duke University; Donato: Boston Consulting Group; Miller: Stanford

University and NBER; Truskinovsky: Department of Economics, Wayne State University; Vera-Hernández:
Department of Economics, University College London and IFS. Correspondence: manoj.mohanan@duke.edu.
Mohanan is lead author. Donato, Miller, Truskinovsky, and Vera-Hernandez contributed equally to the
manuscript.

Page 2 of 89

1. INTRODUCTION
Performance incentives have long been used to correct a range of principal-agent problems
(Jensen and Murphy 1990, Hall and Liebman 1998, Lazear 2000, Roland 2004, Rosenthal,
Fernandopulle et al. 2004). A central issue in the design of performance incentives is whether to
reward an agent’s use of inputs or instead to reward outputs directly (Khalil and Lawarree 1995,
Prendergast 2002, Raith 2008, Prendergast 2011).1 A key underlying assumption in models of
output incentive contracts is that workers know the production function, and if correctly
incentivized, can find the optimal combination of inputs to produce a given level of output.
However, if workers have low levels of human capital or skills, this assumption might be
untenable, leading to suboptimal input choices. Alternatively, agents’ knowledge of the production
function is less relevant for them to be rewarded according to input use (following explicit
guidelines given by better-informed principals). But an important drawback of input incentive
contracts is that highly skilled agents might be penalized if they take advantage of local contextual
information that might be relevant when choosing optimal input combinations to achieve desired
outputs.
In this paper, we study input and output incentive contracts for maternal health care in India
– and the ways in which health providers with varying levels of skill respond to them – through a
field experiment. The production of maternal and neonatal health is complex, and in India, there
is considerable scope for improvement in performance and substantial variation in health
providers’ human capital. We randomly assign private maternal health care providers to two
treatment arms and a control arm. Providers in treatment arms were given incentive contracts

1

The decision depends on a variety of considerations, including the costs of monitoring inputs relative to outputs; the
degree of risk aversion of agents relative to principals; the riskiness of the output measure; the degree to which
productivity is heterogeneous across agents; the extent of distortions due to multi-tasking; and the feasibility of
principals dictating inputs to agents (Lazear 1986, Baker 2002, Prendergast 2002)

Page 3 of 89

rewarding performance either for input use (adherence to guidelines for best practices) or
production of outputs (good maternal and neonatal health – low levels of post-partum hemorrhage,
sepsis, pre-eclampsia, or neonatal death). We also study how responses to performance contracts
vary by levels of skills by comparing performance of providers with advanced medical training to
those with basic medical training. We focus on providers’ implementation of new strategies in the
two contracts and how the effect of these innovations varies by providers’ skill level.
We conducted the experiment in rural areas of Karnataka, an Indian state with poor levels
of maternal and neonatal health in 2012 - 2014. Karnataka’s maternal mortality rate (MMR) was
144 deaths per 100,000 live births, and its neonatal and infant mortality rates were 25 and 31 per
1,000 live births, respectively (NHM 2013, Mony, Jayanna et al. 2015)2. The top three causes of
maternal mortality are post-partum hemorrhage, pre-eclampsia, and sepsis, and the major risk
factors for neonatal mortality are infections (sepsis and tetanus, for example), pre-term births, and
birth asphyxia. Policy efforts to improve maternal and neonatal health outcomes have long focused
on promoting childbirth in medical facilities (rather than in private homes), where many of these
causes can – in principle – be prevented or managed. However, despite rapidly rising institutional
delivery rates (reaching 94.3% in 2015-16) (Government of India 2016), poor maternal and
neonatal health outcomes persist because of low quality maternal health care in medical facilities
(NRHM 2015).
The quality of health services (both public and private) in developing countries is generally
low (Das, Holla et al. 2012, Das and Hammer 2014, Mohanan, Vera-Hernández et al. 2015, Das,
Holla et al. 2016), and the use of performance incentives is increasingly widespread (see Finan,
Olken, and Pande (2015) and Miller and Babiarz (2014) for reviews). Output incentives are more

2 For comparison, India’s average MMR in 2013 was estimated to be 190, and the infant and neonatal

mortality rates were estimated at 28 and 40 respectively (United Nations 2019)

Page 4 of 89

common in the education sector3 while incentives based on service delivery indicators4 such as
institutional deliveries, delivery of prenatal care, vaccinations, and healthcare utilization are
typically used in the health sector.5,6,7 The predominance of input incentive contracts in the health
sector – an environment in which there is often considerable scope for innovation using
local/contextual information 8 – underscores the importance of empirical research comparing
contractual bases in health.
On average, we find that providers in both the input and output contract arms achieved
similar improvements in maternal health, reducing rates of post-partum hemorrhage (PPH – the
leading cause of maternal mortality both in India and globally) by approximately 21 percent.
Performance on other dimensions of maternal and neonatal care (pre-eclampsia, sepsis, and
neonatal survival) did not change in either contract group relative to the control group. 9 In

3

Examples of empirical research on output incentives in education include Lavy (2002), Glewwe, Ilias et al. (2010),
Fryer (2011), (Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2011), Behrman, Parker et al. (2015).
4
Examples of research on service delivery indicators in health include Basinga, Gertler et al. (2011), Soeters,
Peerenboom et al. (2011), Miller, Luo et al. (2012), Gertler and Vermeersch (2013), Ashraf, Bandiera et al. (2014),
Gertler, Giovagnoli et al. (2014), Miller and Babiarz (2014), Olken, Onishi et al. (2014), Celhay, Gertler et al.
(2015), Dupas and Miguel (2016), Sherry, Bauhoff et al. (2017)
5
There have been few efforts to directly reward health outcomes in developing countries. Two recent exceptions in
China and India study interventions outside the medical care system, focusing on childhood malnutrition. Primary
school principals in China, who were offered performance incentives for reducing anemia, were able to reduce anemia
prevalence by 25% by the end of the academic year (Miller, Luo et al. 2012, Luo, Miller et al. 2015). In India, Singh
(2015) found that frontline workers in India’s Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) program who were
offered high levels of incentives were able to reduce severe malnutrition by 6.3 percentage points. The Plan Nacer
program in Argentina introduced performance incentives based on 10 indicators, of which two were outcomes (birth
weight and APGAR scores) and the remaining 8 were self reported / administrative service delivery indicators (Gertler,
Giovagnoli et al. 2014).
6
Fritsche, Soeters, and Meessen (2014) report that the World Bank’s health results trust fund, which supports
performance based financing programs in health, had over 60 projects at various stages of development. Other
examples of performance incentives in developing countries include: (Basinga, Gertler et al. 2011, Peabody,
Shimkhada et al. 2011, Soeters, Peerenboom et al. 2011, Van de Poel, Flores et al. 2016)
7
A recent high-profile health sector example is the Better Birth trial – a RCT promoting adherence to the “Safe
Childbirth Checklist” in rural India, finding some improvement in provision of inputs on the checklist but no
significant improvement in health outcomes (Semrau, Hirschhorn et al. 2017).
8
See http://www.innovationsinhealthcare.org/ for examples of efforts that adopt novel approaches to improving
access to care and improving quality of health care.
9
Note that of the four outcomes, two (pre-eclampsia and neonatal mortality) were included primarily to address
concerns about multi-tasking (i.e., to minimize reductions in effort focused on these conditions). However,
providers can do relatively little to prevent pre-eclampsia, and there are relatively many non-medical factors that
contribute to neonatal mortality.

Page 5 of 89

achieving PPH reductions, providers in both groups used similar strategies (and similar input
combinations), focusing on stocking medicines that reduce bleeding after delivery, for example.
We also find little evidence that output contract providers developed or implemented novel
strategies on average to improve outcomes despite having the flexibility to do so. Moreover,
despite equivalent PPH reductions in both contract groups, input contract payments were
substantially smaller than output ones: average payments for input and output contracts were INR
13,850 and 56,812 respectively (about US $252 and $1033 in 2010).10,11
The response of providers with varying levels of skills to input- and output-incentive
contracts differed in magnitude although this difference was estimated imprecisely. High skill
providers with advanced medical training in obstetrics and gynecology in output contracts stated
that they had implemented new health delivery strategies. They also produced better health
outcomes, reducing PPH rates by 11 percentage points relative to lower skilled providers with
basic medical training who reduced it by less than 1 percentage point; the difference, however,
was just shy of statistical significance (p=0.057). There were no large observed differences in
implementation of new strategies or health outcomes (PPH reduction of 5.6 percentage points, not
statistically significant) between high and low skilled providers in the input contracts group.
We also investigate two potential concerns with our study. First, because we reward
providers according to contracted outcomes among their patients, providers could potentially
manipulate the composition of their patients rather than improving their performance (selecting
patients more likely to experience good health outcomes, for example). To address this concern,
10

Our incentive contracts were not specifically designed to achieve identical levels of outcomes, since the underlying
production function was unknown. The identical levels of performance in the two treatment arms is only a convenient
accident that now enables us to directly compare the cost to the principal of these two types of contracts. However,
since we do not observe providers’ responses across a full range of rates for rewards, we are unable to draw inferences
about efficiency of the two contract structures.
11
The contracts offered providers the potential to earn up to approximately INR 150,000 (about US $2,700 at the
time of the contract – slightly more than 15 percent of a specialist doctor’s salary in Karnataka). Details in Section 3.

