The Role of Behavioral Frictions in Health Insurance
Marketplace Enrollment and Risk:
Evidence from a Field Experiment
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2019-0823.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: I11, I12, D9

Page 1 of 58

Page 2 of 58

November 4, 2020
American Economic Review
AEA Publications
2403 Sidney Street, Suite 260
Pittsburgh, PA 15203
Re: Disclosure Statement
To the Editorial Board of the American Economics Review:
I am an employee of the State of California, working as the Deputy Director for
Evaluation & Research at Covered California, where I have worked full-time since 2013.
As my supervisor, Katie Ravel, the Director for the Policy, Eligibility & Research
Division, had the authority to review and approve the design and implementation of the
mailers used in the RCT described in this research to ensure compliance with
applicable regulations and a seamless consumer experience. With regard to the
analysis and the drafting of the manuscript, Ms. Ravel and other Covered California
colleagues saw early drafts and provided feedback – but at no time did they exercise
editorial control over the research questions, methods, analysis, or the drafting of the
manuscript.
I have not engaged in any outside consulting (paid or otherwise) while working at
Covered California (since 2013).
IRB approval was obtained for this study through the Office of Human Subjects
Research Protections Program at UCLA (IRB#15-001549).
This submitted research article was based on RCT, which was pre-registered with the
AEA RCT Registry (ID# AEARCTR-0002115).

Page 3 of 58
November 4, 2020
Page 2

Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can provide any additional information about
this project and how it relates to my employment at Covered California. I can be
reached at isaac.menashe@covered.ca.gov or at (916) 228-8357.
Sincerely,

Isaac Menashe
Deputy Director for Evaluation & Research

Page 4 of 58

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES
BERKELEY • DAVIS • IRVINE • LOS ANGELES • MERCED • RIVERSIDE • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO

WESLEY E. YIN
LUSKIN SCHOOL OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS, DEPT. OF PUBLIC POLICY
ANDERSON SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT

wyin@ucla.edu

UCLA
SANTA BARBARA • SANTA CRUZ

UCLA SCHOOL OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC POLICY
3250 PUBLIC AFFAIRS BLDG, ROOM 6391
LOS ANGELES, CA 90095

(301) 928-4308

November 2, 2020
Re: Disclosure Statement

To the Editorial Board of the American Economic Review:
From 2016 to 2019, I provided paid consulting to Covered California on topics unrelated to the submitted research
article. In that consulting work, I provided Covered California projections for premiums, enrollment and
government spending in response to hypothetical new state subsidies and plan entry/exit. I have not held a paid or
unpaid positions at an organization whose goals or interests relate to this research.
IRB approval was obtained for this study through the Office of Human Subjects Research Protections Program at
UCLA (IRB#15-001549).
This submitted research article was based on RCT, which was pre-registered with the AEA RCT Registry (ID#
AEARCTR-0002115).

Sincerely,

Wesley Yin
Associate Professor
Department of Public Policy, UCLA
Anderson School of Management, UCLA

Page 5 of 58

The Role of Behavioral Frictions in Health Insurance Marketplace Enrollment and Risk:
Evidence from a Field Experiment+

Richard Domurat
University of California at Los Angeles
Isaac Menashe
Covered California
Wesley Yin
University of California at Los Angeles and NBER

October 22, 2020

Abstract
We experimentally varied information mailed to 87,000 households in California's health insurance
marketplace to study the role of frictions in insurance take-up. Reminders about the enrollment deadline
raised enrollment by 1.3 pp (16 percent) in this typically low take-up population. Heterogeneous effects of
personalized subsidy information indicate misperceptions about program benefits. Consistent with an
adverse selection model with frictional enrollment costs, the intervention lowered average spending risk
by 5.1 percent, implying that marginal respondents were 37 percent less costly than inframarginal
consumers. We observe the largest positive selection among low income consumers, who exhibit the
largest frictions in enrollment. Finally, we estimate the implied value of the letter intervention to be $25
to $53 per month in subsidy dollars. These results suggest that frictions may partially explain low take-up
for marketplace insurance, and that interventions reducing them can improve enrollment and market risk
in exchanges.
JEL Codes: I11, I13, D9
+ We thank John Bertko, Tom Chang, Amy Finkelstein, Craig Fox, Ori Heffetz, Ted O'Donoghue, Sarah Reber, Jessie Shapiro, Mark
Shepard, Doug Staiger, Josh Tasoff, Robert Town, our anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Claremont Graduate
University, Covered California, NBER Winter Health Care meeting, the University of Maryland, University of Chicago, the Wharton
School at the University of Pennsylvania, and the J-PAL North America Health Care Delivery Conference for comments. We also
thank Leah Horgan for graphic design, Sam Lau for research assistance, and Carolina Arteaga, Niza Muñoz, Bianca Vargas and Maria
Lucia Yanguas for their translations. We thank Jim Watkins at the State of California’s Department of Health Care Services. Finally,
we are grateful to our collaborators at Covered California. We are especially thankful to Ahmed Al-Dulaimi, James DeBenedetti,
Andrew Feher, Raymond Jacobs, Lance Lang, Peter V. Lee, Allie Mangiaracino, Vishaal Pegany, Katie Ravel, Yolanda Richardson,
and Colleen Stevens. This study was supported by the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, North America. All errors are our
own. This study was pre-registered with the AEA (AEARCTR-0002115). Corresponding author: Wesley Yin, wyin@ucla.edu

