Asymmetric Consumption Smoothing
Journal: American Economic Review
Manuscript ID AER-2018-1735.R3
Manuscript Type: For Administrative Use Only
Keywords: G4, D12, E21

Page 1 of 61

Asymmetric Consumption Smoothing
By Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David,
Hoonsuk Park, Jonathan A. Parker∗
Analyzing account-level data from an account aggregator, we find
that households increase consumption when they receive (expected)
tax refunds, as if they face liquidity constraints. However, these
same households smooth consumption when making payments in
other years, primarily by transferring funds among liquid accounts.
Even households carrying credit card debt smooth consumption
when making payments, and even highly-liquid households spend
out of refunds. This behavior is inconsistent with pure liquidity
constraints or hand-to-mouth behavior and most consistent with a
mental accounting life-cycle model.
JEL: G4, D12, E21, H31
Keywords: Consumption, household finance, liquidity constraints,
hand-to-mouth, mental accounting, tax refunds
A central feature of consumer behavior is that many consumers delay spending
out of expected income until it arrives. The leading theoretical explanation—
exemplified by the buffer stock model—is that some people are financially constrained and so delay consumption until income arrives. Another leading model
assumes that some households are hand-to-mouth consumers, spending income
as it arrives. These theories of the consumer are central components of modern
New Keynesian macroeconomics.
Our study presents a novel and robust consumption pattern that fits neither
prototype models. We use high-frequency account-level data to document that
when faced with anticipated income, households—across the liquidity spectrum—
increase consumption on the date of cash flow arrival. In contrast, when faced with
anticipated payments, the same households keep their consumption level intact
and use liquid reserves or credit to fund payments. Among the models that we
∗ Baugh: College of Business, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, address1, bbaugh2@unl.edu. BenDavid: Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, and the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER), address2, ben-david.1@osu.edu. Park: Faculty of Business and Economics, the University of Melbourne, address2, hoonsuk.park@unimelb.edu.au. Parker: Sloan School of Management,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and NBER, address2, JAParker@mit.edu. Early versions of
this paper were titled “A Test of Consumption Smoothing and Liquidity Constraints: Spending Responses to Paying Taxes and Receiving Refunds.” We thank the online account aggregator for providing
the data set. For helpful comments, we thank Manuel Adelino, Sumit Agarwal, Michael Boutros, Andrew
Chen, Peter Ganong, Uri Gneezy, Damon Jones, Olivia Kim, Emi Nakamura, Scott Nelson, Pascal Noel,
Michaela Pagel, Michael Palumbo, Joel Slemrod, René Stulz, and particularly our discussant, Annette
Vissing Jorgensen, as well as participants in seminars at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, The
Ohio State University, and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Payments Conference, the Annual
Conference of the Western Finance Association 2018, and the JPMorgan Chase Institute 2018 Academic
Conference. We are grateful for support from a NBER Household Finance Grant, the Ohio Supercomputer Center, and the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business.

1

Page 2 of 61

2

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

review, this asymmetric consumption pattern is best explained by a model of
mental accounting that would lead to different economic dynamics and policy
prescriptions from leading macroeconomic models.
Specifically, we study the consumption responses of households as they file
their U.S. federal income tax returns, receive refunds, and make payments in
different years.1 Households in our select sample—and so to some extent in the
population—exhibit an asymmetry in consumption behavior in response to to
negative and positive cash flows. When faced with a tax payment, households do
not cut consumption but instead make account transfers in advance of payments.
Even low-liquidity households in our sample maintain stable consumption. Yet,
these same households, in other years, increase consumption in response to the
arrival of expected tax refunds. Even the most liquid household-years do so,
albeit at lower rates. The latter observation has been interpreted as evidence of
liquidity constraints.2 Thus, households in our sample shield consumption from
decreases in income when making transitory payments but at the same time follow
a heuristic to consume out of transitory increases in income.
Our sample and data come from a large administrative account-level dataset
from an account aggregator that contains every transaction into or out of linked
checking, savings, and credit card accounts at a daily frequency from 2011 through
2015.3 For a subset of more than 300, 000 household-years, we can observe a
reasonably complete financial picture of the households and can identify the date
of tax filing and the date and amount of tax refund or payment in the current and
previous year. We focus on a subsample of households that receive tax refunds in
some years and make payments in other years so that our results are not driven
by differences in the types of households that receive refunds or make payments.
While our administrative data have many advantages, they come with two
caveats. First, administrative data track transactions, not consumption. Consequently, we measure only a subset of consumption spending that we can clearly
identify as spending on consumer goods and services (retail, restaurants, etc.).
The second caveat is that our sample is not a random sample of the U.S. population, both because households have to select into the account aggregation service
and because they have to file taxes in a way that creates an observable transaction
in the data. In particular, our sample omits households that postpone payment
by filing an extension and those that take up refund anticipation loans instead of
receiving refunds (issues we discuss in detail in Sections I and VI). Thus, our sample is likely to be more liquid than the typical American household, and indeed
our measures of liquidity confirm this conjecture. Further, our select sample may
1 In using variation in tax refunds, we follow Souleles (1999), who studies the consumption response
to the arrival of tax refunds, as well as the contemporaneous work of Farrell, Greig and Hamoudi (2019).
2 See, e.g., Bodkin (1959), Zeldes (1989), Parker (1999), Hsieh (2003), Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006), and the survey articles by Hassan and Fuchs-Schundeln (2016) and Gomes, Haliassos and
Ramadorai (2020).
3 We build on research on consumption using high-frequency data (e.g., Stephens, 2003, 2006; Broda
and Parker, 2014) and account-level data (e.g., Agarwal and Qian, 2014; Gelman et al., 2014; Baker,
2018; Olafsson and Pagel, 2018; Aydin, 2019; Olafsson and Pagel, 2019).

Page 3 of 61

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

ASYMMETRIC CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING

3

also be more financially sophisticated. However, this sample has some advantages
for our analysis. From an a priori standpoint, our finding of excess sensitivity of
consumption to predictable refunds is less likely to be due to liquidity constraints
than it would be in the population.
We measure the consumption response to expected income changes by regressing consumption spending on distributed leads and lags of refunds and tax payments, and distributed leads and lags of an indicator of tax filing interacted with
news about tax status learned during return preparation. The leads and lags of
filing and news serve two purposes. First, and particularly important for payments because they sometimes occur contemporaneously with filing, they control
for the impact of information arrival so that we can cleanly measure the effect
of an anticipated tax payment or refund arrival. Second, they measure the convolution of the impulse response of spending to information about taxes and the
average pattern of its arrival relative to the date of filing.
Our main findings are conveyed by Figure 1, which plots average consumption
spending and fund transfers after de-meaning by both household-year and calendar day for different payment and refund amounts and in the month before and
in the month after the refund or payment date.
First, we observe a striking asymmetry between the consumption response to
refunds and the response to payments (Figure 1, panel B). Consistent with a large
literature, households spend a significant part of their tax refund on consumption
(including on nondurable consumption, such as restaurants) in the month following receiving the refund. In contrast, in years when they make tax payments,
these same households do not reduce consumption spending following making
the payment. This result is novel, in part because few papers have studied the
consumption response to decreases in income.4
According to our regression estimates, people spend over 7% of their refunds
on consumption during the month following refund receipt, an amount that increases slowly to 15% over several months. These responses underestimate the
true increase in consumption (by roughly a factor of 2) because we cannot definitively classify some account transactions. This spending increase starts the day
of refund arrival, and there is no increase in spending related to the timing of the
refund arrival prior to the day of arrival. In contrast, the consumption response
to payments is economically and statistically insignificant, and unrelated to the
precise day of payment.
4 Notably, Gelman et al. (2020) studies transitory unexpected declines in income and conclude that
“even workers with surprisingly low liquid assets can smooth consumption using low-cost methods to
shift the timing of payments for committed forms of expenditure.” In contrast, both Christelis et al.
(2019) and Fuster, Kaplan and Zafar (2018) find that people respond in surveys that they would cut
consumption more in response to transitory negative than positive income shocks. The few other studies of consumption responses to decreases in income have almost exclusively focused on permanent or
highly persistent decreases. Shea (1995b), Stephens (2001), Ganong and Noel (2019), and Jorring (2018)
find substantial declines in spending in the event of wage cuts in union contracts, permanent worker
displacement, when unemployment benefits expire, and when mortgage payments rise respectively. Conversely, Souleles (2000) and Aguiar and Hurst (2005) find that consumption is well smoothed when college
expenses start and when people retire.

Page 4 of 61

4

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

MONTH YEAR

Figure 1. Consumption and Fund Transfers Around Tax Payment or Refund
Panel A shows the abnormal consumption in the month prior to the tax refund or payment dates. Panel B
shows the abnormal consumption in the month of the tax refund or payment dates. Panel C shows the
abnormal fund transfers into the observed accounts in the month prior to the tax refund or payment
date. Panel D shows the abnormal transfers out in the month following the tax refund or payment date.
The markers show averages at every 5% of the data for those who received refunds and at every 10%
of the data for those who made payments. The shaded region represents two standard errors confidence
intervals.

Dollars

A. Consumption: month before payment/refund

B. Consumption: month of payment/refund

600

600

500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0

−100

−100

−200
−8,000 −6,000 −4,000 −2,000

0

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

−200
−8,000 −6,000 −4,000 −2,000

Dollars

C. Funds transfer: month before payment/refund
3,000

2,500

2,500

2,000

2,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

500

500

0

0

−500

−500

0

2,000

4,000

Payment/refund amount ($)

6,000

8,000

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

D. Funds transfer: month of payment/refund

3,000

−1,000
−8,000 −6,000 −4,000 −2,000

0

−1,000
−8,000 −6,000 −4,000 −2,000

0

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

Payment/refund amount ($)

Second, panel A of Figure 1 shows that households do not adjust consumption
down in the month prior to making a payment or up in the month before getting a
refund. We also find no response in our regression analysis as well as no change in
consumption in response to the information about future cash flows that arrives
as tax returns are prepared and filed.
Third, households actively manage liquidity to smooth consumption ahead of
payments but not refunds (Figure 1, panels C and D). In years when households
receive refunds, they make transfers only after receipt. In contrast, households
smooth consumption through tax payments by increasing transfers among accounts in the month before making the payment by about a third of their anticipated payment. These transfers are mostly among observed checking and savings
accounts rather than from outside (likely nontransaction) accounts. We also find

Page 5 of 61

VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE

ASYMMETRIC CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING

5

that households increase transfers in response to the news learned about upcoming payments or refunds prior to and at filing. Finally, households in our sample
have substantial liquidity on average and they manage liquidity over longer horizons: In years when they make payments, households have accumulated somewhat
higher balances in their core accounts.
We provide evidence that these findings are not driven by either the endogeneity
of the timing of the filing of tax returns (results hold separately for households
filing in each month) or heterogeneity across households. While payment and
refund status are also endogenous, determined in part by past income not subject
to withholding, Gelman et al. (2019) provides evidence that this endogeneity does
not cause consumption asymmetry: the paper finds no sharp difference between
the propensity to spend in response to refunds versus payments in a quantitative
life-cycle model, as we discuss in Sections IV and VI.
We show that this consumption asymmetry occurs throughout the distribution
of liquidity, which is further evidence that spending response to refunds for these
households is an unconstrained choice. Households in the bottom tercile of the exante distribution of liquidity have large propensities to consume out of refunds.5
But in this same sample of households with low liquidity, households do not
cut consumption prior to or when making payments, inconsistent with financial
constraints driving the response to refunds.
We also find that for household-years in the top tercile of the distribution
of liquidity, households do not cut consumption when making payments. But
they still increase spending when refunds arrive, albeit at a lower rate than lowliquidity households. This spending behavior among liquid household-years is
consistent with a growing body of evidence that even highly liquid households
have substantial spending responses to predictable increases in liquidity (Parker,
1999; Kueng, 2018; McDowall, 2019).6 These findings imply that a propensity
to consume out of predictable increases in income that decreases with liquidity
is not necessarily indicative of liquidity constraints. For many households in the
population, liquidity constraints very likely determine behavior. However, in our
nonrepresentative sample, households can smooth consumption but choose not
to. Hence, the well-documented excess sensitivity of consumption to increases in
expected income in the population is not purely driven by constraints.
We discuss these findings in light of the theories that are commonly used to
explain household behavior. Among the theories, the models most consistent
with our results are those of mental accounting (Thaler, 1999). Our empirical
evidence matches the predictions of the behavioral life-cycle model of Shefrin
and Thaler (1988), in which households maintain three mental accounts: current
5 This finding is consistent with the literature comparing consumption responses of households with
different levels of liquidity starting with Zeldes (1989), and followed by a large literature including
Jappelli, Pischke and Souleles (1998), Agarwal, Liu and Souleles (2007), Aaronson, Agarwal and French
(2012), and Kaplan, Violante and Weidner (2014).
6 And with papers that find that the propensity to consume is persistent rather than purely driven
by liquidity (See Parker, 2017; Aguiar, Bils and Boar, 2020).

